---
layout: default
title: A Bright New Day: Optimistic Futures for the Jews
tags: [Arts]
created: 1254602481
changed: 1254602733
---
<p>Imagine a world in which Israel, Jordan, Palestine, Syria, and Egypt have cooperative tourism arrangements, Egypt has built a &quot;Science City&quot; in the Northern Sinai, and oil is &ldquo;on par with coffee, sugar and tea in terms of its impact on geopolitics.&rdquo; Jihadists have been &ldquo;neutralized&rdquo;, and progressive Arab democrats are helping democracy blossom in the Arab world. According to Tsvi Bisk&rsquo;s calculations, it&rsquo;s the year 2020, and if the Jewish people take his advice, it is no dream.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Bisk&rsquo;s new, timely, and worthwhile book,&nbsp;<em>The Optimistic Jew</em>, addresses head-on issues of concern to many thinking Jews today, such as the increasing rate of intermarriage, the failing (if not dead) Israeli-Palestinian peace process, and the lack of Zionist fervor both inside and outside Israel. The revolutionary changes that Bisk discusses will not occur overnight, and they require a redefinition of both Jewishness and Zionism.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The first part of the book is devoted to doing just that and presenting the problems facing the Jewish people and Israel. Some of Bisk&rsquo;s initial remarks might seem unfair, or at least untactful, such as his assertion that &ldquo;we must stop making a fetish of past suffering.&rdquo; However, Bisk&rsquo;s sincere desire for Jewish progress, evident throughout the book, will probably prevent people from putting it down.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In the book, Bisk reminds us that the final aim of Zionism, the construction of a model society, remains elusive. Quite frankly, for all of its greatness, Israel, when compared with much of the developed world, is not a model of social justice. Social inequality and corruption have no place in the ideal Jewish State; nevertheless, they have found their way in. Of the relatively small percentage of young Diaspora Jews who care deeply about Israel and the Jewish People, many are eventually co-opted by the growing &ldquo;advocacy industry.&rdquo; The ongoing political and security situation has prompted the creation of partisan organizations on college campuses all over the world for both &ldquo;friends of Israel&rdquo; and &ldquo;friends of Palestine.&rdquo; Constantly presenting a positive Israeli narrative has the effect of distracting young Jews from real problems within Israel that need their attention. Instead of being educated about the problems Israel faces in maintaining its Jewish and democratic character and developing a vibrant civil society, young Zionist idealists are asked to praise Israeli democracy and culture to the sky, essentially blinding them to the fact that the Zionist project is not over and the dream has yet to be completely fulfilled. There is, of course, the possibility that these young Jews will eventually see some of the less praiseworthy aspects of Israel and feel compelled to make Israel live up to the visions they have developed. Let us hope that is the case.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Bisk&rsquo;s book, however, is focused on dealing primarily with invigorating a wider base. He points out that many of the challenges facing the Jewish people today both stem from and contribute to a crisis in Jewish consciousness. A crisis defined by declining rates of Jewish affiliation and participation, and the growing and increasingly visible tensions within the Jewish community. Noah Feldman&rsquo;s less than favorable critique of modern Orthodoxy, appearing under the title &ldquo;Orthodox Paradox&rdquo; in&nbsp;<em>The New York Times Magazine</em>, serves as an example of this tension, exemplifying this crisis of Jewish consciousness. Young Jews from all backgrounds reach a point in their development at which they must decide whether to continue to be active participants in the community or not. &ldquo;Why be Jewish?&rdquo; is the question lying beneath every challenge facing the Jewish community, which is reason enough for Bisk to devote an entire chapter to it, and he does. The general decline in substantial Jewish affiliation among Diaspora Jews, as well as the 50% intermarriage rate, reflects the reality that most Jews have yet to hear a compelling answer.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Surprisingly, Bisk does not have an answer either. One would assume that a book about the Jewish future would contain a rational argument for the continuity of Jewish family life, based on its role in the Jewish mission on Earth. Nevertheless, he writes: &ldquo;From a purely rational standpoint, this question has no answer. From a purely rational standpoint, assimilation is a perfectly legitimate alternative.&rdquo; All Bisk can point to is a widespread &ldquo;unarticulated feeling that Jewish identity is important, even though we cannot say why&hellip;We can use this instinctive feeling as a foundation upon which to build a new concept of Jewish identity.&rdquo; Some will be appalled by this premise; others will be comforted and perhaps even inspired.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The assimilation of the Jewish community is not a manifestation of Jewish self-hatred as much as it is of the universalist direction of the post-enlightenment world. Why hold on to identity? Why not let our different backgrounds and heritages coalesce into a tolerant, non-denominational world civilization? These are questions worth asking because they require honest answers that can at once instill a sense of pride and generate self-criticism. Through serious examination of the nature of Jewish identity, one can come to appreciate the uniqueness of Jewish heritage and tradition and, at the same time, acknowledge its challenges.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Although Bisk makes some good points about the need for greater Jewish tolerance, his inability to present an accurate representation of the Jewish community creates a sloppy foundation for the rest of the book and leads to inconsistencies. For example, he proposes that Jewish identity should be more &ldquo;pluralistic&rdquo; and &ldquo;based upon common norms of communal behavior and communal obligation,&rdquo; which Bisk calls &ldquo;Jewish citizenship.&rdquo; The first problem with Bisk&rsquo;s appeals for increased pluralism is that they are not strictly speaking, pluralistic. Bisk is willing to accept &ldquo;numerous cultural accretions, as long as these do not contain beliefs, practices, or dogmas that contradict Jewish tradition.&rdquo; And he continues, &ldquo;The only universal norms of Jewish identity are the prohibition against idolatry and the requirement of unqualified individual responsibility.&rdquo; Bisk fails to make it clear why we should accept such principles if his proposed foundation for Jewish identity is based on behavior, and not belief &mdash;that is, his &ldquo;Jewish citizenship.&rdquo; Further, for 2,000 years, faith has been at the very least one of the primary mechanisms of Jewish survival. In Humanistic Judaism, there is no room for God. Why should Bisk&rsquo;s new, pluralistic Jewish identity accept a doctrine of no God, and not different gods?</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>In truth, these problems do not render Bisk&rsquo;s arguments useless. Discussing the nature of an identity and a people as complex as that of the Jews is often an exercise in futility. The book&rsquo;s primary purpose is to give the reader a glimpse of what is possible if Judaism and Zionism are enhanced. The second part of the book, entitled &ldquo;Realization: Looking Back from 2020,&rdquo; is a hypothetical account of what the world might look like if the Jews take Bisk&rsquo;s advice. The prospects Bisk presents are rather grand, some of dubious practicality. Although the first part of the book has more to offer, the utility of the second is that it contains what too many Jewish thinkers lack: vision. Bisk&rsquo;s proposals are creative, as well as a bit self-serving (as many of the organizations he plugs in this section are those with which he is deeply associated). However, Bisk will not consider the Jews a failure if some of his initiatives are not realized. He uses his imagination provocatively. The inclusion of discussion questions at the end of the book demonstrate that Bisk does not expect his to be the final word on the subject of the Jewish future. Bisk wants to start a discussion. We would all benefit from taking part.&nbsp;</p>