---
layout: default
title: Calling All Converts: Blogging the Burdens and Blessings of Conversion
tags: [Features]
created: 1255012142
changed: 1255012142
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In my day job, I work in the social media department of a large PR firm. Every day I explain the power of the blogosphere to people who aren&rsquo;t participating in the online community. Major life changes like becoming a parent, getting married, moving to a new country or having a spiritual awakening are reasons that people become bloggers. The wonderful thing about online communities is being able to select the people you want in your neighborhood and then sharing your lives through bits and bytes.<br />
When I speak to a room of Jews, I often introduce myself by two names: my English name, Leah Marie Jones, and my Hebrew name, Leah Meira bat Sarah v&rsquo;Avraham. The &ldquo;bat Sarah v&rsquo;Avraham&rdquo; signifies that I am a convert to Judaism, a Jew-by-choice. When I began studying Judaism in the summer of 2004, my resources were books, rabbis and classes. Very few online resources existed; I knew of only of one blogger who was &ldquo;out&rdquo; as a convert. One conversion site, Convert.com, still hasn&rsquo;t changed since I found the site in 2004.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Because I was already blogging daily about very personal topics, my blog became both a natural outlet for documenting my road to becoming a Jew and a reference for others on similar paths. Every day my referral logs show hits for &ldquo;why do I want to be Jewish?&rdquo;, &ldquo;mikvah blessings,&rdquo; &ldquo;what will the beit din [Jewish court] ask?&rdquo; and &ldquo;Jewish convert blog.&rdquo; It used to be difficult for Jews-by-choice to connect with other converts, but thanks to the power of Google and other search engines, blogs like mine&mdash;which is now called Accidentally Jewish&mdash;have become an online resource and helped us find each other, both on- and offline.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; "><strong>Expanding Jewish Community</strong></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Converts have been coming to Judaism since Ruth told Naomi, &ldquo;Wherever you go, I will go, your God will be my God.&rdquo; Traditionally, once a convert joined the Jewish people, her past&mdash;and thereby, her path&mdash;was not supposed to be spoken of. Therefore, the challenges and joys of becoming a Jew were also not addressed. Today, the blogosphere allows converts to find help on the path to Judaism, the path after mikvah, and to build a more diverse Jewish community. In other words, it helps us find others who also came home.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The first blog I found about conversion was Sushi Kiddush, written by Akira Micah Ohiso. &ldquo;My blogging helped after I converted when I was struggling to live as a Jew and figuring out what it meant to live as a Jew,&rdquo; said 37-year-old Ohiso, now a new father who has very little time to blog.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;I got a lot of support from the Jewish blogosphere with halakhic dilemmas, new feelings about being Jewish, and getting comfortable with my Jewish mother-in-law buying me underpants on sale,&rdquo; said Ohiso, who converted in 2003. &ldquo;[Becoming Jewish] isn&rsquo;t like flicking a switch, it&rsquo;s a process, and blogging helped.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;Conversion started out very lonely for me,&rdquo; said Micah, the 36-year-old writer of Ger Toshav, who is from a growing cohort of converts who do not have Jewish spouses. He began reading converts&rsquo; blogs early on. &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t talk to people about it very much. But I often felt like my beliefs were disconnected from everyone around me, including other family and friends&ndash;even the mainstream world. Blogging (and the Jewish blogosphere) was a door to a &ldquo;connectedness&rdquo; that I was lacking in my offline life&mdash;that there are others out there like me. It was extremely comforting to know that there was a community of folks out there who had&mdash;and were still having&mdash;similar experiences to my own.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">We began blogging as individuals. But collectively, our blogs have created a living archive of what it means to become a Jew and, more importantly, how it felt to go through the study and cultural adjustments involved. While rabbis and cantors are well trained to assist in helping a convert, very few know what it feels like, or the isolation that sometimes accompanies that process.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">For instance, Avi, the blogger behind Tikkun Ger, combs the Internet for video and podcasts that he shares with his readers. His in-depth essays have explored halachic conversion, Reform conversion, and since his engagement, he has written about creating a Jewish family life.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s been part of my Judaism because it&rsquo;s given me a much wider Jewish community to participate in,&rdquo; said anonymous blogger Orieyenta. &ldquo;It offers a chance to be exposed to other elements of Judaism and to discuss Jewish issues with a much broader audience.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Camilla, a 21-year-old college student who is studying for conversion in an isolated community and who blogs at Madame Blue Eyes said, &ldquo;I learn a lot more about Judaism [because of] the Jewish blogosphere. I&rsquo;ll read something and think &ldquo;Wow, I never knew/heard that before&rdquo; and go off to learn more about that particular topic.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Without blogging, I would be involved only with my local Reform congregation and the Young Leadership Division of the Federation. But because of blogging, I also have Orthodox, secular, Israeli, and Canadian Jewish friends who are Jewishly different than I am; without our blogs we wouldn&rsquo;t have a relationship at all.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">As a reader who converted 12 years before I did and recently found my blog explained, &ldquo;You didn&rsquo;t convert to anything, or join anything. You just came home.&rdquo;</span>&nbsp;</p>