---
layout: default
title: Can Education Be Democratic?: Changing the Pedagogical Paradigm
tags: [Ideas and Innovation,Education,community,internet,technology,teacher/student dynamics,democratic school]
created: 1243989314
changed: 1250885943
---
<p>The Internet has made knowledge freer than ever before, empowering anyone with access to it to circumvent the traditional educator&rsquo;s monopolistic middleman role as a pedagogical purveyor. But when educators no longer appear to be unique or necessary, justifying their authority over students grows more tenuous. Our conventional pedagogical methodology has failed to evolve along with technology&rsquo;s liberation of information and the spread of democracy and humanism. Shouldn&rsquo;t students being educated for a high-tech, democratic world have the right to determine the course of their own educations?</p>
<p>Yaacov Hecht, founder of the Democratic School system in Israel, believes that the answer is yes. Hecht&mdash;a high school dropout who nevertheless went on to study clinical psychology as a post-graduate at Bar Ilan University&mdash;was first called to action by a book by Yanush Korchak. One of the first educators to advocate treating children as equals in all the decision-making processes concerning them, Korchak established and directed a school in Poland in the 1930s where he helped with the chores alongside his students. Although the Nazis offered to spare Korchak, because he was a famous writer, he refused to be distinguished from his students and followed them to the death camps. Hecht was also deeply influenced by a visit in the 1970s to Summerhill, a democratic school in England founded by A.S. Neill in 1921, which continues on successfully today.</p>
<p>Following Neill&rsquo;s and Korchak&rsquo;s examples, Hecht opened the Democratic School in Hadera, Israel in 1987. The school functions as a community of equals, where students and teachers work together to establish the rules of the school and the curriculum. No activity in the school is mandatory, and every student is free to choose the subjects he would like to study.</p>
<p>Hecht sees a democratic education as an expression of a democratic society, but is very aware of the paradox of the teacher&rsquo;s authority in a democratic system. &ldquo;In the heart of the democratic education system lies dialogue . . . you have to think how you can create a dialogue between yourself and the students that will be based on mutual respect and not be condescending.&rdquo;</p>
<p>The Democratic School in Hadera rapidly became popular, generating a waiting list of 5,000 children. Unable to answer the demand, Hecht offered to assist anyone who would open schools founded upon the same principles. There are now 26 such schools all around Israel. In 2003, the mayor of Bat Yam approached Hecht and asked him to build a similar program for all the schools in his city. The program reduced violence in the schools by 90% and raised the graduation rate from 50 to 70 percent. Today, 20 cities in Israel follow this program. The Ministry of Education followed suit, issuing reforms such as &ldquo;Ofek Hadash,&rdquo; which is largely based on these same principles.</p>
<p>No other country in the world has adopted the principles of democratic education on such a large scale. Hecht sees it as the beginning of the development of a uniquely Jewish-Israeli educational culture, which is not out of line with the biblical injunction from Proverbs 22:6, &ldquo;Train the youth according to his way; even when he grows old, he will not swerve from it.&rdquo;</p>
<p>However, not everyone agrees that the democratic education system is ideal. Rabbi Yuval Cherlow, head of Yeshivat Petach Tikvah, a Religious-Zionist institution in Israel, says that democratic education is a step in the wrong direction. &ldquo;It is not coincidental that a person is only eligible to vote once he turns 18. There are many things that children at a young age are incapable of doing, and they need authoritative figures to guide and direct them,&rdquo; he says.</p>
<p>Cherlow views the democratic education system as one extreme where &ldquo;kids have all the rights while the teachers have none.&rdquo; According to Cherlow, society as a whole needs to reestablish the value of authority, while nevertheless empowering and educating students according to their way. He believes religious schools can best enforce good behavioral conduct, because students must defer to and show respect toward rabbis and teachers.</p>
<p>Cherlow is not alone in his criticism of democratic education. Secular and religious critics alike have raised eyebrows at the approach for an apparent strain of anti-intellectualism and a disregard for the notion of a common base of knowledge that should be expected of intelligent adults. Some also fear that children left to their own devices will never voluntarily learn anything challenging or worthwhile. But the past 88 years have produced evidence strongly indicating the contrary&mdash;from schools like Summerhill; the Sudbury Valley School, which has run on democratic principles since its founding in Framingham, M.A. in 1969; the Democratic School and its cousins across Israel; and many others worldwide.</p>
<p>David Passig, a Futurist at Bar Ilan University, states, &ldquo;The paradigm that stood at the basis of educational systems for thousands of years was that the educator was supposed to enlighten his students [and] share all the knowledge that was gathered up to that point&mdash;to teach the generation of the future the wisdom gathered in the past.&rdquo; As more knowledge becomes independently available, Passig claims a new paradigm will emerge, one where educators may no longer exercise authority over the children, but they can instead provide useful information that children will want to use to their advantage.</p>
<p>Democratic education may provide a new model in keeping with changing educational needs and conditions. Certainly the means by which we are educated are at least as influential as the content itself, and thus our methodology should be consistent with our societal values and goals. At a time when Israel&rsquo;s mainstream school system seems to be failing at its task, Hecht&rsquo;s vision, while not a panacea, seems to be working for those who choose it. Whether democratic education would work for everyone if the society embraced it completely remains to be seen, as does whether it is capable of harmonizing with the principles of the Jewish religion. But evidence thus far is promising, and in Israel, at least, the larger educational world is taking note.</p>