---
layout: default
title: Come As You Are: Audible Authenticity
tags: [Ideas and Innovation,Education,educational inequality,non-profit organization]
created: 1244318245
changed: 1244318245
---
<p>Moshe Shriki knows&nbsp;firsthand how&nbsp;challenging it can be&nbsp;to navigate Israel&rsquo;s&nbsp;education system. Having received his&nbsp;primary education in the disadvantaged&nbsp;Pat neighborhood of Jerusalem, he was&nbsp;originally described as a &ldquo;gifted&rdquo; student.&nbsp;However, Shriki had issues keeping&nbsp;up when he began high school in the&nbsp;Katamon neighborhood. He was quickly&nbsp;labeled a trouble-maker and his grades&nbsp;plummeted. According to Shriki, &ldquo;I saw&nbsp;that there were gaps between all of us&nbsp;students who came from Pat and those&nbsp;who came from other neighborhoods.&rdquo;</p>
<p>
<p>Shriki dropped out of high school in&nbsp;the 11th grade in order to enlist early in the&nbsp;army. His service was an important turning&nbsp;point in his life. He explained, &ldquo;I had a&nbsp;commander who was the first role model&nbsp;since I was a child who said to me, &lsquo;I believe&nbsp;you can do it.&rsquo;&rdquo; This new faith helped him&nbsp;excel both in his army service and thereafter.&nbsp;Following his service, Shriki earned his&nbsp;bachelor&rsquo;s degree in Middle Eastern studies&nbsp;at Hebrew University, became active in&nbsp;ISEF: The International Foundation for&nbsp;Education, and founded Social Justice&nbsp;Youth, a non-profit aimed at exposing the&nbsp;inequalities in the Israeli education system.</p>
<p>Today, Shriki works with students,&nbsp;teachers, and parents as the director of the&nbsp;Parent Leadership program at Memizrach&nbsp;Shemesh, the Center for Jewish Social&nbsp;Leadership in Jerusalem. Memizrach&nbsp;Shemesh is a non-profit that aims to&nbsp;strengthen a Jewish identity that emphasizes&nbsp;the values of solidarity and justice. Shriki&nbsp;believes his current position has helped him&nbsp;complete a process of understanding the&nbsp;inner workings of education in Israel.</p>
<p>Shriki maintains that one factor&nbsp;causing educational inequality is that&nbsp;some student &lsquo;stories&rsquo; are not represented&nbsp;in the educational curriculum. He refers&nbsp;specifically to the history, literature,&nbsp;and culture of hundreds of thousands of&nbsp;Israelis of Mizrahi descent, those with&nbsp;origins in Middle Eastern countries.&nbsp;&ldquo;When you hear about the place&nbsp;where your family came from in a history&nbsp;or literature class, it strengthens the way&nbsp;you look at yourself. All of a sudden you&nbsp;realize you have something to bring to the&nbsp;table, and you realize it has true value.&rdquo;</p>
<p>A former teacher and principal at the&nbsp;Kedma High School in Jerusalem, Shriki&nbsp;believes that Kedma presents a model that&nbsp;could help solve the problem of inequality&nbsp;in Israel&rsquo;s education system. The school&mdash;located in the Katamonim neighborhood&nbsp;of Jerusalem&mdash;was founded in 1994 by&nbsp;teachers, parents, and social activists. Its&nbsp;student body consists mostly of youths of&nbsp;Mizrahi, Ethiopian, and Former Soviet&nbsp;Union descent from Katamonim and&nbsp;surrounding neighborhoods.</p>
<p>Most of all, however, Shriki believes&nbsp;that parents are the key to solving the&nbsp;challenges children face in disadvantaged&nbsp;communities in Israel. That&rsquo;s why he&nbsp;is excited to be working with parent&nbsp;community groups at Memizrach&nbsp;Shemesh. According to Shriki, only&nbsp;Memizrach Shemesh &ldquo;speaks the same&nbsp;language&rdquo; of parents from the geographic&nbsp;and economic periphery of Israel, giving&nbsp;them the confidence to bring their heritage&nbsp;and traditions into the group process.</p>
<p>This experience encourages parents to&nbsp;become more involved in their children's&nbsp;education and in the community.&nbsp;According to Shriki, parents need to know&nbsp;that their voice is heard, no matter their&nbsp;background. Or, as Shriki puts it, &ldquo;We say&nbsp;to parents: come as you are.&rdquo;</p>
<p>For more information about Memizrach&nbsp;Shemesh, visit www.mizrach.org.il.</p>
</p>