---
layout: default
title: Common Sparks 'Forever' Within: 'Finding Forever' Lacks Common's Sense
tags: [Arts]
created: 1255286994
changed: 1255286994
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">One of hip-hop&rsquo;s most renowned rhyme-rhythm teams is back at it. Rappers Common and Kanye West have joined forces on new album &ldquo;Finding Forever.&rdquo; With their last collaboration on album &ldquo;Be&rdquo; receiving much media acclaim, &ldquo;Finding Forever&rdquo; has a tough act to follow. It feels almost like an ugly step-brother to &ldquo;Be,&rdquo; yet marginally hints to previous classic albums like Common&rsquo;s &ldquo;Like Water for Chocolate&rdquo; (2000) and Kanye West&rsquo;s &ldquo;College Dropout&rdquo; (2004). This album doesn&rsquo;t deliver like their others, not because of any lack of snappy beats nor spot-on delivery. Instead, it&rsquo;s because Common&rsquo;s usual &ldquo;ruah&rdquo; and unintentional Jewish values, that make his other records so divine, are absent from this album.</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Whereas Common isn&rsquo;t Jewish, conscious hip-hop is based on some of the most important Jewish values. While his music can surely pop off a party, its purpose is also to strengthen the community, educate listeners, encourage questions, and challenge the status quo. In fact, these issues make up a short list of Common&rsquo;s favorite themes. For example, in the song &ldquo;Faithful&rdquo; from the album &ldquo;Be,&rdquo; Common muses, &ldquo;I was rollin&rsquo; around and in my mind it occurred/what if G-d was a her?/Would I treat her the same?/ Would I still be running game on her?/ In what type of way would I want her?&rdquo; This idea of a shekhinah is reminiscent of the Shabbat Bride whom we greet with L&rsquo;kha Dodi at Friday Night services. In addition, Common touches upon the Jewish value of perpetual questioning in &ldquo;The Questions&rdquo; from &ldquo;Like Water for Chocolate,&rdquo; where he delivers a nudnik-worthy series of both obvious and complex questions for the listener to ponder and discuss. Common doesn&rsquo;t even try to answer the questions, even more so a Jewish behavior.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The lyrics of &ldquo;Finding Forever&rdquo; do contain some elements of critical thinking, present on previous Common albums. In track three, &ldquo;The People,&rdquo; Common flows with assured sensibility over West&rsquo;s complex and dynamic beat. In addition, he also forces his audience to think of racial and socio-economic divisions, when he says, &ldquo;While white folks focus on dogs and yoga/the people on the low-end trying to ball and get over.&rdquo; In addition, Common utilizes a questioning tone on &ldquo;U, Black Maybe,&rdquo; when he says, &ldquo;I heard a white man&rsquo;s yes is a black maybe/ I was delivered into this world as a crack baby.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">While &ldquo;U, Black Maybe&rdquo; introduces intriguing questions, two other tracks on the album&mdash;&ldquo;Drivin&rsquo; Me Wild&rdquo; and &ldquo;Southside&rdquo;&mdash;make statements that are great to bop to, but lack the complexity we&rsquo;ve come to expect from Common. Actually, &ldquo;Drivin&rsquo; Me Wild&rdquo; features a catchy hook sung by Lily Allen and re-examines &ldquo;all that glitters is not gold&rdquo; in the pursuit for material possessions. While this is still a good point to make, it is a little too Kanye-esque (&ldquo;All Falls Down&rdquo; from the album &ldquo;College Drop Out&rdquo;).</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">One of Common&rsquo;s most impressive lyrical abilities is to create great female-empowered love songs. Common proves he still has the knack for these songs with track nine, &ldquo;So Far to Go,&rdquo; featuring O&rsquo; Mighty Sexy Voice Himself, D&rsquo;Angelo. The song examines what it means to be in a real romantic partnership. The flow sounds as fluid as &ldquo;The Light&rdquo; from album &ldquo;Like Water for Chocolate,&rdquo; and D&rsquo;Angelo&rsquo;s vocals definitely help. Yet, Common&rsquo;s description of what it is to deeply love isn&rsquo;t as convincing, and if you ask me, hasn&rsquo;t been since he and Erykah Badu parted ways, but that&rsquo;s a whole other story.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">Maybe it&rsquo;s because it stimulates critical thinking, or because we have an ongoing history of suffering and overcoming oppression, or perhaps just that we rock our bodies and bob our heads while davening, but for whatever reason, hip hop is a genre that resonates with young Jews. And although Common isn&rsquo;t Jewish, he sure has a yiddishe kup&ndash;a Jewish head on his shoulders.</span>&nbsp;</p>