---
layout: default
title: Competitive Philanthropy
tags: [Society,philanthropy]
created: 1261484244
changed: 1263973950
---
<p><span style="">Side bar for Happy Givers piece <br />
</span></p>
<p>Eric Ackland</p>
<p>Some of us may find something disturbing about the concept of introducing public competition into the world of philanthropy. Public giving is nothing new in Jewish circles though. In a great many traditional shuls on high holidays, aliyot (opportunities to make public blessings over the Torah) and other responsibilities such as opening the ark, carrying and reading the Torah are publicly auctioned off to the highest bidders. This is often the biggest source of revenue for a shul in any given year. (In less traditional shuls, expensive tickets for seats are usually sold beforehand to members.)</p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><span style="">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; </span>More than a few people are put off by this fundraising method, as it appears to make supporting the shul an ostentatious and competitive act that excludes and perhaps even stigmatizes the poorer members of the shul, and should such holy endeavors even be tainted by such worldly considerations as money, especially on our holiest days of the year, when our thoughts and actions are to be concentrated on repentance? Isn&rsquo;t having a public auction pandering to the worst motivations for giving tzedakah, rather than the highest, which Maimonides defined as being anonymous? On the other hand, because people on the high holidays are more prepared to try to make atonement for their sins, maybe it is in itself a mitzvah to create a situation that encourages and enables them to give more generously (and feel more generous), and thus to lessen the weight of their sins in their own eyes, and perhaps, in God&rsquo;s eyes too.</p>
<p class="MsoNormal" style="text-indent: 0.5in;">Other methods are also used to generate revenue for good causes: in many synagogues and institutions donors' names are put on walls and individuals are publicly honored at expensive dinners to encourage others to donate to the cause or organization, and Chabad helped pioneer modern public Jewish giving with its annual Telethon. Furthermore, charitable and philanthropic organizations the world over already&nbsp;actively compete with each other for our tzeddakah through hiring great copywriters, graphic designers, researchers, and skillful direct fundraisers to extract the maximum dontation from all of us, so is there really anything wrong with making the competition more immediate and direct?<br />
<span style="">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; </span>Perhaps the real question is whether it is better to give for pure reasons without thought of personal benefit or not to give at all. In the traditional Jewish understanding of tzedakah we are to give because it is obligatory: we&rsquo;re to do justice. Although we should aspire to do things privately for the highest reasons, ultimately it is more important that the giving get done for the sake of justice, than that we do it for the right reasons. So although the program for the Happy Givers may seem somewhat crass and self-aggrandizing for the participants, if that&rsquo;s what it takes to get young Jews involved in supporting their community, their people, and the world.</p>