---
layout: default
title: Cost of Living
tags: [Arts]
created: 1250888385
changed: 1250888385
---
<p>David Grossman&rsquo;s new book, <em>Isha Borachat M&rsquo;besora,</em> translates literally as &ldquo;A Woman Escaping From a Message.&rdquo; In Israel, the connotation of the word <em>besora</em> (message) acutely depicts the nightmare that the book&rsquo;s protagonist, Ora, is trying to escape: soldiers knocking at her door at 3 a.m. with the besora that her son has been killed in war.</p>
<p>Ora, Ilan, and Avram first meet as teens during the Six Day War. Ora has a relationship with both, but marries Ilan after Avram is taken captive during the Yom Kippur War. Upon Avram&rsquo;s return from the Egyptian prison, Ora and Ilan help him recover from his brutal injuries. During this period of time, Ora and Ilan&rsquo;s first son, Adam, is born. After she gives birth to a second son, Ofer, Avram disconnects himself from the family.</p>
<p>Now, twenty years later, Ilan and Ora are separated. Ofer is recruited to the army after a war breaks out. Ora, paranoid and helpless, runs away from the looming possibility of his death. She takes Avram, whom she has not seen for years, with her on a journey around Israel. It is on this journey that they bridge the twenty-year gap of their friendship, and endeavor to escape not only from the <em>besora,</em> but from the entire <em>matzav</em> (situation). Most of all, Ora wants to escape her greatest fear, what she describes as the &ldquo;nationalization&rdquo; of her family&mdash;that Israel is coming to claim her son&rsquo;s life. Ofer was hers for twenty years, and now Ora must pay her dues.</p>
<p>Israel is a country that almost dictates the nationalization of private emotions. It is a country where the culture of remembrance unifies and takes ownership over the dead. We mourn the loss of &ldquo;our&rdquo; fallen, and say <em>kaddish</em> for &ldquo;our&rdquo; sons. Society becomes a grieving &ldquo;family,&rdquo; known in Hebrew as <em>mishpachat hashchol.</em> Publicly expressed grief becomes the language of the masses and the soundtrack of the nation.</p>
<p>Very few books in Israeli literature have so bravely dealt with the looming fear of death that surrounds Israeli society. Grossman does this so vehemently that it is hard to separate his bravery as an author from his bravery as a father who lost a son in the Second Lebanon War while writing this book. His message is unequivocal: the cost of living in Israel is that society is slowly losing its sense of normality.</p>
<p>Grossman spared no detail or emotion when he wrote this book. He did not leave one wound untouched or one fear forgotten. He evokes sadness in the reader, because the novel forces one to realize, at times, how abnormal life can be in Israel. He evokes hatred for his hero, Ora. She is controlling and paranoid. She makes every food that her son could dream of upon his return from the army, and her son hates her for that. She paces furiously, drives like a maniac, and panics at restaurants. She is every Israeli who goes to extremes to hold on to normality, and forgets what normality is.</p>
<p>When Ofer assuredly tells his mother that it is his responsibility as a soldier to die so that others won&rsquo;t, Ora&rsquo;s horror is difficult to internalize. While Israelis know, and for the large part accept, that they are required to sacrifice their lives for their country, to a non-Israeli reader, this is a difficult concept to comprehend.</p>
<p>It is abnormal to die for the land. It is abnormal to have an Arab taxi driver, a dear friend of Ora&rsquo;s, to drive her and Ofer to a meeting point where a war is being fought between their peoples. It is abnormal to calculate which seat on the bus is safest. It is abnormal to fear a 3-a.m. knock at the door. And it is abnormal to go through border controls when visiting family in Gush Etzion.</p>
<p>Necessary? Absolutely. This is the price that we are destined to pay. Normal? No.</p>
<p>I admit: Living in Israel can be exhausting. Many times I ask myself: why do I put myself through this? I want to get up and leave, but can&rsquo;t. I am not sure where this inability comes from. A burning ideology? A fear of the unknown? Or a mere resignation&mdash;what is meant to be will be.</p>
<p>Rarely can a book change lives in the way that Grossman&rsquo;s book has. It is part of the price that he paid, with his son&rsquo;s death, and it is a gift that he has given us, so that we remember the cost of living, at least as much as we remember the cost of dying.</p>
<p><em>Shuki Taylor works for Yeshiva University Center for the Jewish Future, in Israel. He enjoys buying books. His wife thinks that he buys too many of them, but she reads them nonetheless.</em></p>