---
layout: default
title: Digital Zionism
tags: [Features]
created: 1267537037
changed: 1271863471
---
<p>Looking back at the past decade, one of the most fascinating developments has been the emergence of social media and the culture that surrounds it. Access to information has become effortless with the continuous emergence of new technologies. The pace at which news reaches us now happens in a matter of minutes, sometimes seconds.</p>
<p>In today&rsquo;s digital society, social media presents new and exciting opportunities for political engagement. During Israel&rsquo;s Cast Lead operation during the winter of 2008-9 and Iran&rsquo;s anti-government protests last summer, civilians used social media to post instantaneous updates and personal accounts of what they were seeing. Social media is intrinsically grassroots and, most importantly, democratic. Anyone with a computer and an Internet connection can participate in sharing and shaping information. As such, it is the tool that Zionists can use to do their part in actively reporting the facts about Israel.</p>
<p>There is a surge in negative discussions that depict Zionism as a disease that the world needs to be cured of and Zionists as the vermin that spread it. The reactions of the Zionist movement are focused more on reputation management and advocacy rather than proactive communication about Israeli life. The emergence of social media has been advantageous for the Israel Lobby, as reaching Diaspora Jews and Israel advocates is easier as the quality of the information exchange becomes more intelligent and democratic.</p>
<p>&ldquo;In a time when the world looks towards a computer screen for continuous stimuli and new information at every available waking moment, it is fundamental that the Jews be on top of our game. We must be present and ahead of the curve if we are going to successfully target the next generations to be aware . . . Zionist, and Jewish leaders,&rdquo; said Aimee Weiss, Midwest Director of Masa Israel Journey and USD/Hagshama in Chicago. Weiss began a campaign in the United States in which she uses mainly Twitter and Facebook to promote what is being called Digital Zionism. Weiss defines Digital Zionism as, &ldquo;using web resources and tools to promote and disseminate information and action on Zionism through social media advocacy and expression.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Give Israel Your United Support (GIYUS), an organization comprised of more than 15 Jewish and pro-Israel organizations, is seeking to &ldquo;build an online global community of friends of Israel and empower them with cutting edge technology that will allow them to support Israel on the Internet in just a few minutes of their time.&rdquo; GIYUS established its website&mdash; <a x="y" target="_blank" href="http://www.giyus.org/">www.giyus.org</a> &mdash; during the war in Lebanon in the summer of 2006.</p>
<p>Since its launch in 2006, more than 50,000 people have downloaded GIYUS&rsquo;s Megaphone software that delivers real-time alerts about key articles, videos, blogs, surveys, and updates to encourage communication between individuals and organizations through live news feeds that call for members to respond. This free software allows users to voice opinions and support Israel on a public opinion front using online technology.</p>
<p>Newspapers and networks measure users&rsquo; online posts, comments, and letters as a way to gauge their audience&rsquo;s preferences. Increased regular participation of a pro-Israel voice would draw attention to news editors. If Israel advocates increase this communication with the support of organizations and coalitions like GIYUS, it would be possible to influence change in both public opinion and news coverage of Israel.</p>
<p>However, as Alex Margolin of HonestReporting notes, &ldquo;we . . . discovered that we are more effective taking the message directly to the social media sites that draw large numbers of people, such as Facebook.&rdquo;  Posting an interesting YouTube video, link to a website, or even a newspaper article on Facebook has the potential to raise awareness among dozens&mdash;or even hundreds&mdash;of people.  Sharing information via channels like Facebook allows the user to participate in dialogue rather than voicing an opinion to a single news editor. A more enthusiastic Digital Zionist can even take the time to send links and post comments to target groups and networks. Pro-Israel and Jewish organizations and groups who manage Facebook pages can also provide their members with regular updates and information about how they can make an impact online.</p>
<p>&ldquo;Social media has been very effective in helping us promote our messages and events and reach our activists to engage them. It provides a quick and easy way for our supporters to spread the message to their friends and family,&rdquo; said Mark Waldman, Executive Director of the Canadian Jewish Political Affairs Committee (CJPAC) which is a supporter of GIYUS and was recognized by the Jewish Telegraph Agency (JTA) as one of the most influential Jewish organizations on Twitter.</p>
<p>While GIYUS and its supporters are present on social networking sites, a number of Jewish and Zionist organizations still have not jumped into the Digital Zionist revolution with both feet. Weiss believes that most Zionist organizations have not taken serious enough effort to utilize social media to promote their missions and activities. She suggests that social media updates and strategy should be a full-time job at nonprofits. Weiss personally spends a great deal of time both at home and work on social networking sites, posting fun facts, news articles, questions, personal sentiments, and information about Israel and Zionism. &ldquo;Even if just one person reads something I post or blog about, and it has a positive effect on them, then I believe all the time spent is worth it,&rdquo; says Weiss.</p>
<p>As Weiss exemplifies, being a Digital Zionist means you consistently and authentically devote time to connecting and informing your online networks about issues that you believe matter most. It&rsquo;s about linking credible information and facts about Israel to your online networks, both public and private. Social media provides the medium through which the Zionist movement can effectively change the status quo, as it appeals to target audiences in a grassroots way. Active participation in Digital Zionism simply means taking at least a few hours a week participating on social networking sites about issues facing Israel and the Jewish community.</p>
<p>
<p style="margin-top: 0.5em; margin-bottom: 0.9em; ">As Margolin points out, &ldquo;Anyone who thinks that social media is a fad that will go away is making an error. The tools may change &mdash; Twitter and Facebook could disappear &mdash; but the process of online social peer-to-peer engagement that forms the basis of social media will clearly continue.&rdquo;</p>
</p>
<p><strong><span x="y" style="font-style: italic; ">Naomi Haworth is a public relations graduate student in Toronto, Ontario. She is a passionate Zionist and technological determinist.</span></strong></p>