---
layout: default
title: Editorial: As We Emerge
tags: [Here and Now]
created: 1255290849
changed: 1255290849
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Why is it that we seek community? Well, not all of us&mdash;but for the most part, we humans tend to get lonely when we're alone. Or is it that we just have more fun with others? Either way &mdash;a denial of pain or an increase in pleasure&mdash;community has certainly been a core value for Jews across the ages, and from the number of Facebook Groups and Events invites sent a day, it seems it is a core need today as well.&nbsp;As the all-volunteer staff of&nbsp;<em>PresenTense</em>&nbsp;brought together the voices for this issue, we were amazed by the range of issues and identities around which communities can gather. Communities can be forced into formation by the hard facts of geography (see &ldquo;Not Just a History Lesson,&rdquo; and &ldquo;The Lein in Spain&rdquo;), form locally due to spiritual calling (see &ldquo;Judaism of the Brain&rdquo; and &ldquo;Large Knit Kippas and Flowy Skirts Not Required&rdquo;), or operate across vast distances and spot encounters that grow into lasting friendships (see &ldquo;Get Off My Blog&rdquo;). But more than anything else, communities tend to have a purpose (as are the communities featured in &ldquo;Putting the Social Back in Socialism&rdquo;). In making clear that purpose, communities provide a meaning for the life of each and every member of who joins.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">We're working to make&nbsp;<em>PresenTense</em>&nbsp;a community of purpose, and lately we've grown.&nbsp;<em>PresenTense</em>&nbsp;started as a Magazine, a volunteer, grassroots operation spanning multiple timezones and continents, whose fifth issue you have before you now (the first was called Issue Zero&mdash;which we admit, might have been a mistake in hindsight; but when we did it, it was cool).&nbsp;<em>PresenTense Magazine</em>&nbsp;held events across the&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on">US</st1:country-region>&nbsp;and&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>, including salons, concerts and art exhibits.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">But we realized that our mission to provide a platform for encouraging Jewish creativity was only partially realized; you can only do so much with a magazine. So in the summer of 2007, the Magazine was joined by the&nbsp;<a href="http://www.creativezionism.com/" style="color: rgb(190, 30, 45); text-decoration: none; ">PresenTense Institute</a><span style="color: black; ">, a center for socially-minded pioneering based in&nbsp;<st1:city w:st="on">Jerusalem</st1:city>&nbsp;that provides fellowship opportunities to entrepreneurs, open-to-the-public lectures on topics affecting the Jewish here and now, and workshops for up-and-coming leaders in the third sector from&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:country-region w:st="on">Israel</st1:country-region></st1:place>&nbsp;and around the world. In the summer of 2007, 18 fellows were accepted, 12 projects were launched from across the disciplines, and six projects are seeing early success less than half-a-year since graduation. Over the next few years, the Institute will expand to offer year-long fellowships and opportunities to equip pioneers with the tools and networks they need to bring new ventures into the world, and will expand seminars and discussion series to locations around the world.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Another thing we learned about communities in putting together this issue is that communities of purpose can thrive when they spread their vision and look to build partnerships with others who share common ideals. Recognizing that the Magazine and the Institute serve as an action tank, generating new ideas, methods and best practices,&nbsp;<em>PresenTense</em>&nbsp;has launched a Consulting Group to help translate these findings for organizations seeking to adapt to the new reality created by the digital revolution and the rise of social networking technology.</span></p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">And finally, to help coordinate and focus this vast energy,<em>&nbsp;PresenTense</em>&nbsp;will soon launch the&nbsp;<em>PresenTense Network</em>&nbsp;to provide an organizing framework to direct the unique skills, passions and abilities of people around the world towards the needs of the Jewish People. Since we believe that each and every Jew has a unique spark of creativity that can benefit and be benefited by a collective framework, and that the Jewish People has a collective potential that can be best realized by individual actualization in conversation with communal challenges, we want to provide the framework to realize Jewish creativity. To be a community of communities, to help new visions emerge&mdash;to be a platform for Jewish life&mdash;is our way of being true to the ever-changing here and now.</span>&nbsp;</p>