---
layout: default
title: Had Me At Shalom: The Israeli Ulpan Experience
tags: [Society,Education,ulpan]
created: 1244579805
changed: 1244735662
---
<p>What&nbsp;educational&nbsp;entity&nbsp;encompasses&nbsp;every age group from first&nbsp;grade to retirement, exists&nbsp;only in the Jewish homeland,&nbsp;may be found in someone&rsquo;s&nbsp;home or in a government&nbsp;building, serves the Haredi&nbsp;and super-secular, and is nearly free? Ulpan!</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>The ulpan is a unique Israeli creation that emerged from the&nbsp;ingathering of diverse Jews repopulating their homeland. German-speaking&nbsp;Holocaust survivors, Jews fleeing Arab countries,&nbsp;<em>olim</em> (immigrants to Israel) from North America, France, and&nbsp;Argentina, as well as one million Russian-speaking Jews have all&nbsp;been served by an ulpan. One can see brain surgeons from Ivy&nbsp;League schools grasping to learn Hebrew alongside immigrants&nbsp;with barely an elementary education, and a moneyed entrepreneur&nbsp;from the United Kingdom struggling through <em>poalim</em> (verbs) while&nbsp;a Ukrainian with no formal education picks them up quickly.&nbsp;Everyone meets and greets in ulpan, the great equalizer.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>Ulpanim come in as many flavors as the Jewish people. The&nbsp;serious Ulpan Akiva in Netanya, with its strict homework schedule&nbsp;and teachers who are quick and sharp in their feedback, is often&nbsp;touted as &lsquo;The Ulpan of Ulpans&rsquo;. &ldquo;They know exactly how much&nbsp;they can stuff into each [four-week] segment before you have brain&nbsp;freeze,&rdquo; says Aliza Aziz, a new <em>olah</em> from California. &ldquo;Everything&nbsp;I learned in two years of college Hebrew is taught in four or five&nbsp;months in the beginner class!&rdquo; She studies in dalet-plus, the eighth&nbsp;level. Many who attend this serious ulpan recommend it as the&nbsp;fastest track to getting up and running with the language. Students&nbsp;are of every age and religious background&mdash;Christians visiting the&nbsp;Holy Land, Israeli Arabs, and new <em>olim</em>.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>Kibbutz Magan Michael&rsquo;s colloquially coined&nbsp;&ldquo;Ulpanapalooza&rdquo; caters to the younger crowd who take socializing a&nbsp;little more seriously than Hebrew. But apparently fun and learning&nbsp;Hebrew can go hand in hand. Mike Flax, the manager of this&nbsp;ulpan, says that while the partying is paramount, the ulpan earns&nbsp;the highest scores in the Ministry of Education&rsquo;s exit exam.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>Ulpan Etzion in Jerusalem targets the 20-to-30 crowd, just&nbsp;out of college and off the plane. Simi Suttner, who made aliyah&nbsp;(immigration to Israel) in July &lsquo;08, started at Ulpan Etzion together&nbsp;with immigrants from 27 countries, including France, Chile,&nbsp;Turkey, Belgium, Brazil, Russia, India, and Argentina. Ulpan&nbsp;Etzion is a dorm ulpan, where the olim share learning, living, and&nbsp;adapting to a new culture. Fresh from dental school in Canada,&nbsp;Suttner took the Israeli licensing exams while attending ulpan,&nbsp;appreciating the instant social network the ulpan provided. She&nbsp;describes it as &ldquo;five months of summer camp with new friends.&rdquo;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>Jerusalem&rsquo;s Ulpan Or is a private ulpan that runs like a&nbsp;language school, and is priced accordingly. Claiming to teach&nbsp;&ldquo;Hebrew at the speed of light,&rdquo; it offers a unique combination of&nbsp;one-on-one lessons with a workbook, MP3 files, and afternoon&nbsp;sessions of &ldquo;Caf&eacute; Ulpan&rdquo; where students converse, facilitated&nbsp;by a teacher. I attended this ulpan for five days and found it&nbsp;effective. My most memorable moment was when I told the&nbsp;teacher he was a mazleg chazak (strong fork). Clearly my ulpan&nbsp;days are not over yet!</p>