---
layout: default
title: In the Footsteps of the Father: Walking Abraham's Path
tags: [Here and Now,magazine,PT5]
created: 1257268616
changed: 1257268616
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Jerusalem, Hebron, Damascus and the Euphrates River are not usually found together on a typical holiday itinerary, but a new initiative is planning to take intrepid travelers through at least six different Middle Eastern countries, hitting the above locations and many more. The new cultural tourism project, called the Abraham Path, aims to take travelers of all backgrounds along the route the father of monotheism is believed to have navigated over 3,000 years ago.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Parts of the terrain, which includes Turkey, Iran, Syria, Jordan, Israel and the West Bank, are even more treacherous to pass in 2008 than they were in Abraham's time. Though he wandered by foot, the ease of travel afforded to modern travelers by road and air transport is rapidly cancelled out by the modern-day political and ethnic turmoil in many of the countries through which the tour hopes to pass. Currently, Israeli citizens cannot legally travel into Syria, and Jordanians will be barred entry into Iran if their passports are stamped with an Israeli visa; so how does the 1,200 km path hope to succeed? While the vision maybe be ambitious, the organizers of the Abraham's Path Initiative, founded by Harvard University's Global Negotiation Project, are realistic. &ldquo;The Initiative has no political agenda, and will not attempt to change any nation's policy on border control or visa regulations,&rdquo; say the organizers. &ldquo;Most visitors from the West will be able to travel the entire length of the Abraham Path without any problem, and visitors from most countries of the Middle East will be able to travel large portions of the route.&rdquo;<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Combining religion, geography, and history can be a recipe for confrontation, but the initiative hopes to use the path to focus on the shared cultural heritage of places rather than dwell on their differences. Jerusalem and Hebron have become a focus for Jews wanting to connect with their religion and past, as well those attempting to assert sovereignty over them in the present. Consequently, they have become flashpoints for tensions as Jewish and Palestinian claims compete. Another place where biblical figures have been invoked to promote tourism is the City of David archaeological site in the Arab village of Silwan in East Jerusalem. The visitor's center has become one of the city's top tourist attractions owing to the incredible archaeological discoveries of the original city of Jerusalem, which some claim could be the site of King David's palace. But the project has come under fire for promoting a selective Judeo-centric narrative that excludes other histories and cultures, including that of the current Palestinian residents of the neighborhood. The Abraham Path takes an entirely different approach, using places associated with Abraham in Holy Scriptures as intercultural meeting places and economic catalysts for the localities.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">In Israel, work is beginning in the Negev through a partnership with Ben Gurion University to develop the path southwards from Beersheba. &ldquo;The path is being developed within each nation initially. Where there are no routes, we will assist in their creation,&rdquo; explains Josh Weiss, managing director of the Initiative.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">The whole path won't be ready for some time, Weiss says, but small tours will be beginning this year, with groups traveling by bus and hiking in Turkey and the Palestinian Authority. In Jordan, travellers will engage in `voluntourism' activities to help build the path there. The organizers don't claim to follow the precise route of the Patriarch's ancient wanderings, but the path will begin and end with sites that the three Abrahamic faiths concur he once resided, beginning near the ruins of Harran in Turkey where Abraham is said to have heard G-d's call to go to &ldquo;the land I will show you,&rdquo; and ending at his final resting place at the Tomb of the Patriarchs in the battle-scarred West Bank city of Hebron (Al-Khalil in Arabic).<o:p></o:p></span></p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">For more information and to view the route, visit <a href="http://www.abrahampath.org">abrahampath.org</a>.</span>&nbsp;</p>