---
layout: default
title: Inheriting the Holocaust: Survivors' Grandchildren Connect Worldwide
tags: [Society]
created: 1255293178
changed: 1255293178
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p align="left" style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">I</span><span style="color: black; ">n the last room of the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum in<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:city w:st="on">Washington</st1:city>&nbsp;<st1:state w:st="on">DC</st1:state></st1:place>, there is a photograph of a two-year-old in the ghetto of the post-war displaced persons camp, standing on a curb and clutching a doll by its plaster pinky finger. My mother believes she is that child.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">It is powerful to see a parent's picture in a Holocaust museum at the end of a series of exhibits that expounds the tragedy and loss of the Shoah. But I'm not alone: I'm a member of the &ldquo;Third Generation,&rdquo; a constructed term that describes anyone with a survivor for a grandparent. As the Third Generation matures into adulthood and begins to come to terms with its traumatic family history, members are beginning to connect around their shared past.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">In my pursuit of self (and generational) understanding, I recently hosted a salon on the topic of the Third Generation through the young adult program where I work, GesherCity Boston. We met with the specific intention of finding out why we were inclined to come together&mdash;what was it about this identity, this sense of familial belonging, that prompted us to find out what we had in common?<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">I've often wondered about the ramifications of having grandparents who survived Auschwitz and a mother born in&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on">Bergen-Belsen</st1:place>; how my personality, my life and my choices have been shaped by the continuous Holocaust discourse that encompassed my childhood. In the salon, I found that many of us had similar questions, and all were grateful for the venue, the community, and the opportunity to explore how this enormous event, foreign yet familiar, had molded our identities.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">The grandchildren are perhaps the last to have a personal relationship with survivors, and certainly the last to see a picture of a parent in a Holocaust museum. Through new Third Generation community groups, research initiatives and programs spanning the globe, the role of the Holocaust is coming into the spotlight for twenty-something grandchildren of survivors grappling with their identities and communal roles.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">In February of 2005, Daniel Brooks met with other grandchildren of Holocaust survivors to talk about their shared familial history. The meeting became a jumping off point for a new community group, called 3G. &ldquo;After looking, I realized that 3G groups and/or initiatives didn't exist,&rdquo; says Brooks. He wanted a forum in which to discuss &ldquo;what our family history meant to us, how this connection influenced our identity as Jews, and also how it influenced our politics, world view, etc.&rdquo;<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Since Brooks' initiative, the community has grown rapidly. Today, 3G in&nbsp;<st1:state w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">New York</st1:place></st1:state>&nbsp;has a mailing list of six hundred and a steering committee of ten. It is a registered non-profit organization, and runs a variety of events such as lectures, film screenings, wine tastings, and Shabbat dinners, where attendance can range from ten to one hundred young people.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">&ldquo;We've already fostered a sense of community among our members,&rdquo; says Brooks. Still, the group is looking to expand even further in membership and mission. To that end, 3G&nbsp;<st1:state w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">New York</st1:place></st1:state>&nbsp;plans to invite more survivors to speak to the group and to host further discussions on the subject of intergenerational transmission of trauma. &ldquo;Many of us feel that although Holocaust education is standardized,&rdquo; says Brooks, &ldquo;[people] don't have opportunities to discuss with others like us the meaning of the Holocaust, how it's viewed in the mainstream, and what it means to us.&rdquo;<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">The Third Generation community has had wider success online. On Facebook, Aaron Biterman started the &ldquo;Grandchildren of Holocaust Survivors&rdquo; networking group. The online community boasts nearly five hundred members and seven virtual administrators from as many cities.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">&ldquo;I would like to see more 3G groups established in local areas, which is why I created this group,&rdquo; says Biterman. &ldquo;It's very important that 3Gs connect to each other&hellip;our families are a very significant piece of history's puzzle.&rdquo;<o:p></o:p></span></p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">The Third Generation has also been fodder for new psychological research. After interviewing over twenty individuals on their Third Generation identities for a research paper towards her psychology degree, Natalie Krasnostein, an Australian native, took the project further with a six-week workshop involving ten descendants. The workshop, conducted with a grant from the&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Melbourne</st1:placename>&nbsp;<st1:placename w:st="on">Holocaust</st1:placename>&nbsp;<st1:placetype w:st="on">Museum</st1:placetype></st1:place>, became known as 3GH (an acronym for &ldquo;Third Generation Holocaust&rdquo;) and produced a documentary titled<em>Somewhere Inside of Us</em>. &ldquo;It was a powerful, profound and deeply successful process,&rdquo; says Krasnostein, &ldquo;in that it allowed us [descendants] to confront who we were.&rdquo;</span></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">The success of the workshop is spreading. This December, Krasnostein will be sponsored&nbsp;by the Wiener&nbsp;Library to bring the 3GH workshop to&nbsp;<st1:city w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">London</st1:place></st1:city>. She is also in conversation with the group created by Brooks to raise funds for a March workshop. &ldquo;We hope to create a global network, to encourage a deep and honest 'working through' of intergenerational effects of Holocaust trauma,&rdquo; says Krasnostein. Stressing the importance of both communal and individual needs to reconcile a devastating family history, the workshop serves as a powerful tool to collectively work through participant issues related to inherited trauma. &ldquo;The work that 3GH aims to do is to encourage and invite ourselves to process our personal, cultural Jewish identities, to talk about what was once silent&mdash;the silent scars.&rdquo;</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; "><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 16px; line-height: normal; "><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">As the last living link to the Holocaust begins to deal with issues of trauma and community, it is clear that the effects of the Holocaust extend beyond its survivors. At GesherCity's salon, attendees found that the conversations were tinged with a certain indescribable weightiness; we felt guilty about intermarriage because of the Holocaust and we felt pressure to succeed because of the Holocaust. But there was solace in talking to each other. We felt bound by a collective sense that we were bonding because of an event we didn't experience ourselves, and an inherited weight we could never really negotiate or understand. Reclaiming this event and terming it &ldquo;Third Generation&rdquo; goes beyond the righteous demand to preserve the memory of the Shoah; it is about recognizing that just like the genes we inherit, whether we want them or not, we are bound to the memories of our family.</span>&nbsp;</span></span></p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>