---
layout: default
title: Jews, Power and the Return to Zion: A Guide for the Politically Perplexed
tags: [Arts]
created: 1255441950
changed: 1255441950
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">For many young American Jews,&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>'s existence raises uncomfortable questions about Jewish power. Our generation seems to have rejected the Jewish pride of our parents. We do not share the memories of those previous generations who witnessed the Jewish people salvaged from the refuse pile of history, empowered to determine their collective fate through the formation of a state. American Jewish leaders are up in arms about the growing distance between young American Jews and&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>, but what is it exactly about Jewish power that remains so elusive&mdash;and so alienating&mdash;to young American Jews?<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">The strange relationship between Jews, power and politics is an influential, but rarely acknowledged, facet of modern Jewish identity. A stateless people throughout all of Diaspora history, Jews were assumed to be immune from politics. The idea of a Jewish political tradition was entirely subsumed by the perception of Jewish victimhood and oppression. But when interpreted through the rubric of power, Jewish history is cast in a strikingly different light; Diaspora Jewry practiced a peculiar politics of powerlessness, constrained by the hatred and power of their enemies, and animated by their will to survive.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Sovereignty, prosperity and M-16s notwithstanding, modern Jews have inherited&mdash;and continue to play out&mdash;a tradition molded by centuries of dependence and accommodation. Though Jewish sovereignty in&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;provided a radical alternative to the historic conditions in which these politics emerged, it is not clear if Jewish power really began in 1948. As Ruth Wisse brilliantly articulates in her recent book,&nbsp;<em>Jews and Power</em>, the historic patterns that underlie contemporary tensions between Arab anti-Zionism,&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>'s ongoing struggle for existence, and Jewish adjustments (political, intellectual and moral) to the ongoing siege are key to understanding our current situation. Wisse argues that Jews have always been creative political strategists within their limits, exchanging external dependence on local rule for internal religious and cultural autonomy. This approach allowed for marvelous feats of survival, but produced two painfully unintended effects: a &ldquo;foreign policy&rdquo; that made the Jews ideal targets for genocide, and an internal political culture whose currency relied on moral (rather than physical) strength. This enabled an ability to accommodate, adapt, and regenerate following each successive catastrophe; however, over time, an emphasis on sheer survival replaced the potential for real power. Wisse maintains that by describing existence alone as a &ldquo;miracle&rdquo; of survival, Jewish political values may have crossed &ldquo;the moral line into veneration of political weakness.&rdquo; In the context of anti-Semitism, the morality of such a cultural trait itself is called into question.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">How have young Jews internalized this tradition? Arab anti-Zionism has effectively cast&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;as a pariah nation, and Zionism as a pariah ideology. Using the tools of mass media, geographic spread, and ties to one billion Muslims worldwide, the anti-Zionist movement has formed a vast empire with its propaganda, penetrating and visibly shaping mainstream perceptions about&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>'s behavior. Arab anti-Zionism has already demoralized much of Israeli society, where the legitimacy of the State is routinely questioned in both mainstream and fringe sectors. A vicious cycle of hostility and threat have imperceptibly eroded its people's confidence, self-respect and support for their own country. As&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;drifts from her own Zionist moorings, her existence seems all the less appealing and necessary in the eyes of dispersed observers.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Recent trends confirm that today's Jewish youth, like their predecessors, are sensitive to external influences in both positive and negative ways&mdash;witness the widespread appeal of hipster Judaism (and its roots in Diasporist queer Yiddishkeit culture). Trends toward anti-Zionism are a byproduct of this encounter with mainstream culture. Young people instinctively know which qualities distinguish them from others, and in today's world, Zionist beliefs set one apart. It's a potent combination for &ldquo;alienation&rdquo;: the influential and ubiquitous message of anti-Zionism that preys on otherwise well-meaning liberals, the characteristic of young people to seek acceptance from the majority, and the Jewish political tradition of accommodation.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Young American Jews are, of course, American, and therefore profoundly anti-ideological, inclined towards faith in solutions, but not necessarily at the cost of comfort or life. Before he fled the Nazis in 1933, Karl Mannheim theorized that material prosperity correlated with a decline in utopian thinking. Post-war&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">America</st1:place></st1:country-region>marked the &ldquo;End of Ideology&rdquo; (similarly, much of the Zionist canon has become irrelevant for many Israelis, particularly as the country embarks on a path of economic growth). If they study Zionism at all, most young American Jews are taught Herzl and Ahad Ha'am, whose philosophies did not predict the complexities, or worse, enemies faced by the modern State today. Herzl assumed the Arabs would be moved to join the Jewish &ldquo;model nation,&rdquo; while Ha'am's vision of a Hebrew cultural mecca had no need for a military or means of self-defense.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">The Jewish political tradition, as described in&nbsp;<em>Jews and Power</em>, is a force that many have sensed but few have been able to put into words. Jewish patterns of adjustment have aided the anti-Zionist movement in grinding down the moral confidence of many Jews with a force of great momentum. Programs like birthright<st1:country-region w:st="on">israel</st1:country-region>&nbsp;offer hope, as they enable transformative experiences on a collective scale, connecting young American Jews to&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;with unprecedented success. But in the long term, tourism will not be able to sustain an intellectual framework that ties Jews to the Jewish State; experiential knowledge will fade and be replaced with old habits. Rather, the answer lies with thinkers like Wisse, who provide a basis for exploring the ways that political history defines current narratives of power, and alert us to the ways that Jews continue to keep themselves from being free. Works like&nbsp;<em>Jews and Power</em>&nbsp;mark the beginning of a new conversation, one that will introduce this generation to a discourse based on political logic, moral confidence and strength.</span>&nbsp;</p>