---
layout: default
title: Losing Their Religion?
tags: [Society]
created: 1250887135
changed: 1250887135
---
<p>There is something inherently jarring about the college experience&mdash;moving from your parents&rsquo; house to a frat house, from living with family to spending the majority of your time with peers. This newfound independence allows students to try and do things never allowed under their parents&rsquo; roofs. For many students, college creates the opportunity to physically and intellectually separate from those who had informed many, if not all, of their choices. Religion and religious beliefs are no exception.</p>
<p>For some religious students, college exposes them to other ways of practicing and experiencing religions, which can lead students to reassess, revaluate and rethink the way they have lived their lives. In a study entitled &ldquo;How Corrosive is College to Religious Faith and Practice?&rdquo; Mark D. Regnerus and Jeremy E. Uecker found that &ldquo;64 percent of those [who attended services previously]&hellip;.have curbed their attendance habits,&rdquo; conveying a significant decrease in religious practices as they are generally understood.</p>
<p>Josh Stone, a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, grew up in what he calls a &ldquo;bubble.&rdquo; But college allowed him to see outside the walls of his house, his school, and his previous views of religion. &ldquo;The way I was raised was the only way I really knew, and the people who answered my questions, the books in which I sought answers independently, all came from a single frame of mind and point of reference. They all shared similar theologies and world views,&rdquo; Stone said. In the four years he was at Penn, Stone &ldquo;reformatted&rdquo; the entire way he practiced&mdash;or, rather, didn&rsquo;t practice&mdash;his Judaism. &ldquo;This is not to say that I was pulled in numerous directions once I got to college, or that I was confused,&rdquo; said Stone, &ldquo;it just showed me that there was more to Judaism than rules, that Judaism can be something you &lsquo;feel&rsquo; rather than something you &lsquo;do.&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>
<p>Sara Kent comes from a similar background to Stone&rsquo;s. &ldquo;I came to college from a pretty monolithic environment. I had always gone to Jewish schools, went to Israel for the year and considered myself pretty Modern Orthodox,&rdquo; Kent says. Like Stone, Kent found religious life in college to be vastly different than what she had been taught. &ldquo;Only while at university was I able to see the world from a larger and deeper perspective, greatly affecting the life choices I was making,&rdquo; she said. For Kent, this new exposure led her to shift from her definition of Judaism as Orthodox practice to one of communal engagement. Her days were filled with meetings for a plethora of Jewish causes and activities not necessarily centered around the synagogue or religious practice.</p>
<p>A large factor in these shifts has to do with the practical realities practicing Jews face while on campuses. The day schools many students come from ensure that religion is scheduled into the day&mdash;prayer time is allotted and kosher food is served. On campus, however, praying, eating kosher, and even keeping Shabbat can become a juggling act. Kevin Stein from Brandeis said, &ldquo;I have a busy schedule and Jewish classes, davening, learning, and practice are not scheduled parts of it like it was in high school or [at yeshiva in] Israel. I have to prioritize and think about what it important to me to do at this moment and what I have time for. I have to make that extra effort to do all of those things which were before taken for granted.&rdquo; The need to &ldquo;schedule in&rdquo; religion coupled with the pressure of class and extra-curricular activities presents hurdles some students choose to avoid.</p>
<p>The college campus presents intellectual challenges as well. Martha Greenberg from Brandeis was constantly challenged in one of her classes. &ldquo;All of the books on the syllabus were&hellip;hypercritical of the rabbis in the Gemara. Students in the class would frequently make comments about how the Gemara was chauvinistic and outdated,&rdquo; Greenberg recalled. Coming from a day school where she learned Gemara six times a week and lived a life governed by its laws, Greenberg had a very different view of what the rabbis of the Gemara were saying and the role which women play in Orthodox life. &ldquo;I would definitely speak up quite frequently&hellip;I felt like I needed to defend the various <em>halakhot</em> discussed regarding women and some of the reasons behind them,&rdquo; Greenberg said. &ldquo;I was definitely the only one in the classroom who felt this way.&rdquo; She found it frustrating to keep having to defend her religious beliefs in a forum intended for absorbing new information.</p>
<p>This is not to say that college life does not allow students to maintain their religious practices or that an Orthodox lifestyle runs counter to the college experience. Still, the college life&mdash;in the classroom and out of the classroom&mdash;creates both practical and philosophical religious challenges for many students, which can, and often does, lead to some shift, change, or adjustment to their religious ideals and practices.</p>
<p><em>Judith Heistein graduated from Barnard College in 2007, where she managed not to lose her religion. She currently works as an International Affairs Analyst at the ADL.</em></p>