---
layout: default
title: Moving People
tags: [Society]
created: 1250887012
changed: 1250887012
---
<p>&quot;That&rsquo;s why people become involved in organizing&mdash;because they think they&rsquo;ll get something out of it. Once I found an issue people cared about, I could take them into action. With enough actions, I could start to build power.&rdquo;</p>
<p>That&rsquo;s how Barack Obama, in his autobiography, <em>Dreams from My Father</em>, recounts his experience learning from Jerry Kellman, his first boss and organizing mentor in Chicago. Kellman, a Jew working to mobilize the black communities in Altgeld, one of the poorest neighborhoods in America, had himself been taught how to build such power by Saul Alinsky, the founder of modern-day community organizing.</p>
<p>Alinksy was born in 1909 to Russian-Jewish immigrants and brought up in the slums of Chicago&rsquo;s Jewish South Side. His father was a tailor, and the family lived in the back of his store. As the only son, Alinsky had a particularly strong bond with his mother, who was just 17 when he was born. &ldquo;She taught him that ... individuals [must] be responsible for other individuals and that you can&rsquo;t just walk away when you see something that&rsquo;s not right,&rdquo; Alinsky&rsquo;s son David reminisced.</p>
<p>Just a few months before his death in 1972, Alinsky recalled in Playboy Magazine the story of a revenge attack he led on a group of Polish boys for beating up a Jewish friend. He was arrested and bailed out by his mother who took him straight from the police station to the local rabbi. &ldquo;The rabbi just looked at me for a minute and then said very quietly, &lsquo;You think you&rsquo;re a man because you do what everybody does. But I want to tell you something the great Rabbi Hillel said: &lsquo;Where there are no men, be thou a man.&rsquo; I want you to remember it.&rsquo; I&rsquo;ve never forgotten it.&rdquo;</p>
<p>He was then just ten years old, but Alinsky quickly became the man. He graduated from the University of Chicago, majoring in criminology, and through a project studying juvenile delinquency he was drawn to the Back of the Yards neighborhood, made famous by Upton Sinclair&rsquo;s . It was there that he witnessed firsthand poverty even more extreme than that in which he himself had grown up. It was to become a test bed for his theory of change, that any area, however dire, could be revitalized through organizing.</p>
<p>His success in the Back of the Yards led the way for Alinsky to found the Industrial Areas Foundation (IAF) to train organizers and organize communities nationwide, in other industrial areas. Amongst those who Alinsky inspired were leaders of all colors, from Cesar Chavez to Hillary Clinton, as well as dozens of organizing networks&mdash;from The Gamaliel Foundation to the Pacific Institute for Community Organizing (PICO).</p>
<p>These organizing networks are communities or congregations that unite in membership to act together to deliver social change. Rather than one leader imposing a set of goals on the group, membership dues are paid to fund an organizer to help identify common concerns and the decision-makers who can improve the lives of the constituency represented. It is classic Alinksy methodology, uniting and empowering people to act together in a common self-interest and secure a shared goal.</p>
<p>Though organizing existed in America before Alinsky, he developed a new focus on the process of change. Social change was important to him, but the empowerment of disadvantaged communities to deliver that change was just as critical.</p>
<p><strong>Jewish Organizing Today</strong></p>
<p>Though organizing has Jewish roots, it is only very recently that the Jewish community has formally engaged in Alinsky-style organizing. Synagogues across the country are joining organizing networks&mdash;from 20 in 2000 to nearly 100 in 2007&mdash;supported by Jewish Funds for Justice (JFSJ), the organization at the forefront of promoting community organizing in the Jewish community.</p>
<p>Ben Ross, Director of Organizing at JFSJ, explains that more synagogues and temples are organizing because it: &ldquo;is a means of addressing social inequities while simultaneously transforming communities and synagogue life ... synagogue members share their stories, deepen relationships with one another, discover issues of common concern, and act to improve the lives of members of their communities, cities and states.&rdquo;</p>
<p>The role that JFSJ plays is one of facilitator, providing matching grants to congregations to enable them to join organizing networks for the first time; providing resources and training to promote organizing; provoking discussion on organizing through its blog jspot.org; convening national conferences to share knowledge of organizing across the Jewish community; and inaugurating a leadership program at seminaries to train rabbinical and cantorial students and placing them with organizers to develop real-world experience.</p>
<p>This latter initiative is most innovative, giving future religious leaders a better understanding of organizing to introduce to their congregations. Mike Schultz, a final-year student at Yeshivat Chovevei Torah Rabbinical School, helped establish the course at the school as part of the JFSJ Jewish Clergy Task Force.</p>
<p>Schultz first became involved in organizing during his undergraduate years at Harvard. He believes organizing to be an excellent technique to realize his mission as a rabbi: &ldquo;to use the guidance of the Torah to empower our communities to do the work for which we were given life&mdash;<em>li&rsquo;ovdah ulishomrah,</em> to develop and care for the world.&rdquo;</p>
<p>But there are obstacles, both theologically and sociologically, to the involvement of Jews in organizing. &ldquo;Many Jews, particularly those from comfortable families, are uneasy speaking openly about their issues, particularly if problems, to those outside their community.&rdquo; As well, there is &ldquo;a degree of suspicion of the appeal to self-interest that is integral to organizing, which many feel is wrong in hesed or social justice programs.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Alinsky admittedly has his critics. The left questioned exactly this belief in working within the system, whether in fact overhauling the system&mdash;capitalism&mdash;was in fact needed. Many did not agree with his antagonistic and confrontational tactics to deliver change; &ldquo;the action is in the reaction&rdquo; was a favorite Alinsky saying. Nevertheless, organizing looks set to spread further as it continues to deliver what it sets out to do: drive social change. And with an organizer on the cusp of the presidency, and a nation to mobilize, the contribution that Jews are making may herald a new dawn for our own community and the community-at-large.</p>
<p><em>David Russell is from the East End, where he volunteered as a community organizer. He relocated to the Lower East Side to study the lessons that British organizers can learn from their American counterparts, and will return to London next year to continue that work.</em></p>