---
layout: default
title: No Place Like Home: Scaling Up a Venture to Success
tags: [Features,community,magazine,philanthropy,PT9]
created: 1255617420
changed: 1255619328
---
<p>When I first approached four friends  from high school about turning their  home into a center for Jewish life,  I certainly did not think it would  spread to 28 cities across five  continents so quickly.</p>
<p>It was 2006, and I was having dinner  with friends. All were in their 20s, all  very happily identified as Jews. All had  large groups of Jewish friends, despite  being uninvolved in organized Jewish  life. And the idea came up: if I could  subsidize their rent and give them a  small program budget, they would turn  their house into a community center  for Jewish adults who have finished  college but have yet to move on to  having families. As the Executive  Director of the Forest Foundation at  the time, my foundation was able to  cover 85 percent of the budget&mdash;  making the idea a proven reality, and  leaving us with the question: How do  we expand on a good idea?</p>
<p>We knew we needed to harness  technology. We never thought about  expanding to 28 cities within three  years. But we realized that even with  three cities, we would have too much  information to manage everything  by hand. We had to track receipts,  programs, pictures, reporting, etc.  We needed a system that was  essentially paperless.</p>
<p>The second component of scaling  up was building the team. Expanding  alone would lead to burnout before  anything was brought to scale. There  had to be a team in place that could  grow with the initiative. Because the  team needed to work together every  day, we assembled productive and  fun people who excited one another  about the project. The initial <a href="http://www.moishehouse.org/">Moishe  House</a> team consisted of me (to raise  the money), a software programmer  (to make it paperless and online)  and a program manager (to make  sure Moishe Houses were doing a  good job).</p>
<p>Once the team was in place, we  hoped that people would want the  product and would continue to create  vibrant young Jewish communities.  We have been very surprised by the  amount of organic growth we&rsquo;ve  experienced. For the past three years,  I have received an e-mail a week  from a new group wanting to create  a Moishe House in their city. Our  initial goal hadn&rsquo;t been to create an  international network. Rather, it was  to implement an innovative idea in a  cost-effective way.</p>
<p>There have been many challenges  along the way. As an innovator, I find  the hardest thing is to say &ldquo;no.&rdquo; I love  new ideas and I want to say &ldquo;yes&rdquo; to  everything. But with budget and time  constraints, I find myself constantly  having to make sure we stay focused,  accomplishing one goal at a time.  Since August 1, 2008, Moishe House  has been an independent nonprofit  and I left my position at Forest to be  its executive director, where I hope to  continue to expand the venture. But  to do it, we need our team in place  and new partners to support our  work. Every city with a young Jewish  population deserves at least one  Moishe House. This is an excellent  example of what can be accomplished  with a good idea and a lot of desire.</p>