---
layout: default
title: Our Heroes
tags: [Ideas and Innovation,PT11,jewish heroes]
created: 1281362588
changed: 1281362588
---
<p>What does Jewish heroism mean to young Jews in the here&nbsp;&amp; now? How will the actions of our generation&rsquo;s heroes&mdash;&nbsp;and what they stand for&mdash;change the future? For this issue&nbsp;of PresenTense, our eleventh in print, we set out to address these questions&nbsp;of where our generation finds its inspiration. We discovered that&nbsp;our heroes include sportsmen and statesmen, community organizers&nbsp;and community builders. With their wisdom, charisma, and clarity of&nbsp;message, each has a compelling case to make as a role model whose impact&nbsp;could not only change the world, but also how we interact with it.&nbsp;</p>
<p>One trend appeared particularly strong&mdash;rather than siding with&nbsp;the most famous or popular, many of today&rsquo;s young Jews tend to champion&nbsp;unique heroes whose message in some way speaks to them personally.&nbsp;In the &ldquo;My Hero&rdquo; section (p. 15), PresenTense contributors&nbsp;make the case for some of their personal heroes. Whether it&rsquo;s a leader&nbsp;in the local community whose personal narrative inspires (&ldquo;Exodus to&nbsp;Empowerment,&rdquo; p. 17), a historic global leader who provided a message&nbsp;which resonates today (&ldquo;For Israel&rsquo;s Sake,&rdquo; p. 16), or someone entirely&nbsp;imagined to introduce a new message (&ldquo;A New Recipe for Israeli&nbsp;Heroism,&rdquo; p. 18), these personal heroes give us insight into who we&nbsp;are, and who we can be.</p>
<p>Jewish heroes can teach us lessons applicable to our growth as&nbsp;young leaders (&ldquo;Rules of Engagement,&rdquo; p. 12). But how does this influence&nbsp;come about? In addition to citing individual instances of heroes,&nbsp;many of us thought it meaningful in contemplating heroism to&nbsp;examine the mechanism of magnetism and motivation and its effects&nbsp;on society. The Great Schlep (&ldquo;Conversation for a Change,&rdquo; p. 22), for&nbsp;the cause of electing Barack Obama to the American presidency, is one&nbsp;such study of leadership effecting change. A different case of the impact&nbsp;of a charismatic figure is found in the Na-nach movement (&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t&nbsp;Worry, Be Breslov,&rdquo; p. 21). Conversely, others argued that a void existing&nbsp;in religious leadership can be detrimental (&ldquo;Seeking Spiritual&nbsp;Shepherds,&rdquo; p. 24). For a generation that is all about being proactive,&nbsp;it is perhaps natural for us to observe how the heroic example of one&nbsp;person can in turn cause others to take up the mantle of leadership in&nbsp;becoming activists for the cause.</p>
<p>Adventurous, global, and high-tech, our generation flocks to the&nbsp;example of the entrepreneur, 21st-century hero (&ldquo;The Path of the Entrepreneur,&rdquo;&nbsp;p. 20). Here at PresenTense, we believe in not only having&nbsp;important conversations around the meaning of heroism to young&nbsp;Jews, but also in actively working to cultivate the heroes of our generation.</p>
<p>In growing the next generation of social entrepreneurs, PresenTense is enabling young pioneers to launch their ideas into successful&nbsp;ventures, and simultaneously working to upgrade the Jewish People&rsquo;s&nbsp;operating system to incorporate these new visions for the future. If you&nbsp;have an idea that will ignite a new path of Jewish heroism, we want to&nbsp;hear from you!</p>
<p>It goes without saying that all of PresenTense&rsquo;s contributors are our&nbsp;heroes (&ldquo;Meet the Heroes of <em>PresenTense</em>,&rdquo; p. 4)&mdash;who are yours?</p>