---
layout: default
title: Oy-Bay Goes to the Movies: Shtarkers and the Sweet Science
tags: [Arts]
created: 1255286613
changed: 1255286613
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">When you say &ldquo;Jews&rdquo; and &ldquo;sports,&rdquo; you&rsquo;re inviting self-deprecating humor or someone&rsquo;s impassioned invocation of Sandy Koufax. But you can almost bet that people aren&rsquo;t likely to mention boxing. But maybe they should&mdash;as this year&rsquo;s San Francisco Jewish Film Festival illustrated, back in the 1920s, boxing was the only professional sport in which significant numbers of American Jews participated.</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">At this year&rsquo;s SFJFF, the largest and oldest continuously-held Jewish film festival in the world, there was a proclaimed focus on &quot;Jewish Boxers:&nbsp;<em>Shtarkers&nbsp;</em>and the Sweet Science.&quot; Though it might clash head-on with the common image of the spindly, wimpy nebbish, as boxing historian Mike Silver wrote, &ldquo;All but forgotten today is the fact that, during the first half of the 20th century, boxing was a major spectator sport, rivaling baseball in popularity, and by 1928, a full third of all title contenders were Jewish.&rdquo; But then again, most young adult American Jews identify only our modern day middle-class life as the typical Jewish experience, which is obviously far from historically accurate.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The film that opened the festival, &ldquo;His People,&rdquo; a 1925 black-and-white silent work recently found and restored by the National Center for Jewish Film, provided the audience with a precious reminder of the roots of the immigrant experience of American Jewry; in presenting scenes of a bustling ghetto street market and boxing venues, the film displays a rough and crowded Lower East Side experience where families worked hard and fought to feed their families.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The film focuses on the Cominskys, a family of Russian Jews living on New York&rsquo;s Lower East Side. The eldest and cherished son, Morris, is educated and begins a promising law career, but resents his immigrant roots. The younger son, Sammy, works as a newsie and then as a professional boxer to put Morris through school and support their family. Morris is studious and graduates law school, while Sammy is uneducated, participates in a blood-sport, and has a romantic interest in an Irish girl in their tenement. Initially, one might peg Morris as the proverbial &ldquo;good son,&rdquo; and Sammy as the &ldquo;wicked son.&rdquo; But as the movie progresses, we see that Morris is self-absorbed and embarrassed by his family. Sammy, on the other hand, gives all of his prize-fight winnings to his doting mother, even after his father, David, throws him out of the house upon discovering his participation in boxing.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Since it was made during a time when filmmaking was both costly and difficult, that some authentic Jewish expressions avoided the cutting room floor was a pleasant surprise. A Shabbat dinner scene is surprisingly thorough, showing the benedictions over the candle-lighting, the wine, the hand-washing, and the bread, with special focus on Rose Cominsky, the family matriarch, as she recites the prayer over the Shabbat candles.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The audience packed into San Francisco&rsquo;s historic Castro Theatre erupted in viper-like hisses as Morris, about to wed his boss&rsquo;s daughter, dismisses his father from his pre-nuptial banquet, telling guests that he&rsquo;s never seen him before in his life. And thunderous applause, and even whoops of joy, broke out when Sammy drags Morris home, in front of all his guests, by his ear. Watching this film was a shared Jewish communal experience, where we laughed, cried, cheered, and booed at a film that exhibited our collective heritage and our internal and external conflicts, played out by a Jewish family. This is the authentic movie-going experience, which can never be replicated, even by home entertainments that are increasingly high-tech.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The film reminds us that such seemingly innocent examples of integration, in the context of the intervening decades, now serve as portents of the assimilation of American Jewry. As upright as Sammy is, and as educated as Morris is, neither is focused during the Shabbat meal, neither one wears a kippah, nor do they study Torah. Sammy ends up with an Irish girl, and instead of staying in a large Jewish community, David and Rose move out to California. In their struggle to survive economically and to keep their family together, it seems as though David and Rose Cominsky fail to pass on yiddishkeit, a feeling of Jewishness, to their sons.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">A contemporary young Jew, awash in internet and iPods, might dismiss the film&rsquo;s relevance. But it seems that the issues facing our immigrant-ancestors are not terribly different than our own.</p>
</span></p>