---
layout: default
title: PDXPlosion: Portland Is Good for the Jews
tags: [Here and Now,community,magazine,PT5]
created: 1257017526
changed: 1257017922
---
<p><span style="border-collapse: separate; color: rgb(0, 0, 0); font-family: 'Times New Roman'; font-size: medium; font-style: normal; font-variant: normal; font-weight: normal; letter-spacing: normal; line-height: normal; orphans: 2; text-indent: 0px; text-transform: none; white-space: normal; widows: 2; word-spacing: 0px;" class="Apple-style-span"><span style="font-family: Tahoma,Verdana,Arial,Helvetica,'Bitstream Vera Sans',sans-serif; font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; text-align: left;" class="Apple-style-span">
<p style="margin: 0px 0px 1em;">A large city with a small-town feel, Portland, Oregon is relaxed yet sophisticated, eco-friendly but chic&mdash;a top-five destination city for young college graduates. And now youthful fortune-seekers have more reason to head for the Rose City, as local masterminds transform Portland into a thriving metropolis where it's hip to be Jewish.</p>
<p style="margin: 0px 0px 1em;">From wilderness-traipsing to organic beer-brewing, from rowdy dodgeball to serene meditation, Rose City Jews in their 20's and 30's demand programming tailored to their edgy, outdoor ethos. Michigan transplant Jodi Berris and Oregon native Sarah Liebman answer the call, uniting young Jews of all backgrounds and connecting them with the greater Portland Jewish community in unusual ways.</p>
<p style="margin: 0px 0px 1em;">Rewind to July 2005. Portland's young Jewish community languished, a social wasteland but for monthly happy hours organized by the local Federation's Young Adult Division, until Berris introduced 1-800-SHABBAT, Discovery Production's nationwide program matching young adults with community hosts for a traditional Shabbat dinner followed by a dessert gathering with peers. Berris parlayed this into Portland Jewish Events (<a style="color: rgb(190, 30, 45); text-decoration: none;" title="www.portlandjewishevents.com" href="http://www.portlandjewishevents.com/">www.portlandjewishevents.com</a>), now the umbrella organization for 1-800-SHABBAT, and for similar yom tov (holiday) meal arrangements; an annual December 24th Christmas Eve bash for Jews; Israeli club nights; Jewish holiday-themed brew parties, and even a &ldquo;Dodgeball and Drinks&rdquo; league.</p>
<p style="margin: 0px 0px 1em;">Berris's current undertaking is a new Moishe House, the Forest Foundation's international initiative that funds Jewish communal homes as gathering places for young adults. Portland's Moishe House keeps strictly kosher and is shomer Shabbat (Sabbath-observant). Since opening on January 1, 2008, Berris and her housemates have sponsored Superbowl and Super Tuesday gatherings, presented a lecture by PresenTense's Ariel Beery, initiated a men's basketball league, and pioneered two alternating, weekly series&mdash;&ldquo;Hebrew with He'Brew&rdquo; and &ldquo;Torah on Tap&rdquo;&mdash;that combine education with recreation.</p>
<p style="margin: 0px 0px 1em;">&ldquo;When you see a dance floor filled with young Jewish adults, some wearing kippahs and some having never seen a kippah, and everyone is just partying all together without the barriers of Reform, Orthodox, Conservative, [or] Reconstructionist, you know you're doing something right,&rdquo; notes Berris. Naomi Fink, a 2003 emigrant from New York City, agrees. &ldquo;Before these events, I would go to service here or an event there, but I never felt like I belonged to a community. I especially like that I've found a ton in common with people both significantly more and less religious than myself. I can watch the Super Bowl with an Orthodox rabbi, play volleyball in a Jewish setting with my buddies from work, or boogie down with a bunch of Israelis.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin: 0px 0px 1em;">Sarah Liebman established Machar (Hebrew for &ldquo;tomorrow&rdquo;) and Urban Jews PDX (the airport code for Portland) in fall 2006 to foster Jewish literacy/leadership and to facilitate grassroots Jewish networks within her demographic. Machar (<a style="color: rgb(190, 30, 45); text-decoration: none;" title="www.urbanjew.org" href="http://www.urbanjew.org/">www.urbanjew.org</a>) provides Jews who are college graduates, but not yet parents, with the training, connections, and seed money necessary to birth novel events for their peers. Machar participants, or Macharniks, attend classes from the Florence Melton Adult Mini School, an international venture designed by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem to discuss Jewish texts in an open, pluralistic environment, and present leadership workshops. Urban Jews PDX, an email listserv, informs young Jews about the latest happenings from Machar and other Jewish groups.</p>
<p style="margin: 0px 0px 1em;">In their first year, Macharniks created &ldquo;Succot at the Farmer's Market,&rdquo; a Jewish outreach education initiative on hunger, and started a Portland chapter of Mosaic, a national Jewish outdoor group. They hosted film festivals, concerts, Middle East peace dialogues, Rosh Hodesh (a traditional celebration of the new moon, long associated with women, and adopted as a women's holiday in modern times) study groups, and presentations by alumni of Jewish service programs. &ldquo;It's inspiring to watch Macharniks imagine the Jewish community they want to live in, and then build it,&rdquo; Liebman observes.</p>
<p style="margin: 0px 0px 1em;">One Macharnik, Shoshanah Krall, has founded a leadership project called Kayam, an eco-conscious Jewish communal home. &ldquo;Many community leaders are prevented from achieving their dreams by the difficult side of organizing,&rdquo; Krall laments. &ldquo;Machar eases that difficulty to a degree I wouldn't have believed possible.&rdquo; Machar also enriches the personal lives of its participants. Danit Polunsky explains, &ldquo;Having a Jewish connection has been invaluable. Machar has created a niche for me: full of friends, support, and learning. I have found a new concept of my own Jewish identity.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin: 0px 0px 1em;">Within months of Machar's inception, Liebman received numerous calls from Jewish leaders in the broader community, seeking advice on how to reach young Jewish adults. Liebman created &ldquo;Talkin' About My Generation,&rdquo; a workshop on bridging the generational gap subsequently profiled in The Jerusalem Post. Armed with new knowledge, local synagogues and organizations initiated programs geared to this demographic. Machar also received funding from Greater Portland's Jewish Federation. &ldquo;Machar exemplifies the kind of creative grassroots approach to engaging younger Jews that we need. The so-called organized community should be supporting these entrepreneurial initiatives without stifling them,&rdquo; suggests Machar Advisory Board member Dr. Jonathan Woocher, Director of the Lippman Kanfer Institute think tank and Chief Ideas Officer for JESNA, an educational partner and beneficiary of United Jewish Communities. Machar's Advisory Board is evaluating Machar's potential as a national pilot program.</p>
<p style="margin: 0px 0px 1em;">Thanks to innovators like Berris and Liebman, Jewish initiatives for young adults flower in Portland and may spread to Jewish communities throughout the country. Hip Jewish programming, Portland-style: coming soon to a neighborhood near you.</p>
</span></span></p>