---
layout: default
title: Take That, Borat
tags: [Around the World]
created: 1250885726
changed: 1250885852
---
<p>Jewish world tours rarely include Kazakhstan. Like the country itself, the Jewish community often gets misplaced. Kazakhstan&rsquo;s Jewish community has shrunk to an estimated 30,000 people out of 15 million Kazakhstanis spread across 2,717,300 square kilometers. The Jewish communities of most former Soviet Republics are often thought of as being fatigued, inadequately Jewishly-educated, and as places where Judaism is rarely openly discussed due to years of Soviet repression. This may have once been true, but is no longer entirely accurate.</p>
<p>I arrived in Aktobe, the capital city of the Aktobe Province in northwestern Kazakhstan, as a Peace Corps volunteer in November 2007. Once there, I sought out the Jewish community, starting with only a phone number, a web address, and poor Russian skills. Despite the community&rsquo;s pride in diversity, the center of the Jewish community, a Jewish Joint Distribution Committee-sponsored <em>Hesed</em> and Jewish Culture Center, does not actively publicize itself. The apartment where the center is located is unmarked except for a <em>mezuzah.</em></p>
<p>After a month in the country, I found the community Hanukkah dinner, which was held in a caf&eacute; owned by Ya&rsquo;akov, a man in his early 40s and the most (and perhaps only) observant Jew in Aktobe, who was co-sponsoring the event with the Hesed. The attendees, who ranged in age from 40 to 80 years old, all seemed interested in an American being there. Still, I felt out of place. I expected to sing Hanukkah songs, eat latkas, and light a chanukiah. Instead, we sang Beatles songs, ate nondescript, but tasty, salads, and watched the chanukiah on the counter sit candle-less and unlit. I thought at the time that this dinner was representative of the Jewish community in Aktobe. I stayed in touch with Ya&rsquo;akov, and yet it was months before I discovered the larger and more diverse Jewish community.</p>
<p>Ya&rsquo;akov and I began to hold regular Shabbat dinners every few weeks in the back of his store. I especially liked the kosher <em>plouf,</em> a traditional Uzbek dish with rice and meat, likely one of the only kosher <em>plouf</em> in all of Kazakhstan. I hoped my being an American Jew would stir interest. I quickly found, though, that an American Jew holds novel value when people are already assembled, but is a feeble pull as a tool of assembly.</p>
<p>In early February, Ya&rsquo;akov and I began to organize a Passover Seder with the <em>Hesed.</em> We expected around 25 people. The night arrived and just 10 people filtered in. The city had held a multicultural celebration of diversity that same day which had lasted all day long, and the younger Jews finished attending the festival too late and thus were too tired to celebrate the religious part of Judaism.</p>
<p>At the festival, 25 young Jews had danced the <em>horah </em>in front of a crowd unlikely to assemble elsewhere: Kazakhs, Russians, Uzbeks, Ukrainians, Koreans, Armenians, Muslims, Russian Orthodox, Protestants, and Jews. The audience watched as raptly and cheered as loudly for Havah Negilah as for any traditional Kazakh song.</p>
<p>That the youth chose to celebrate a multicultural festival and not the Seder led me to realize that different definitions of &ldquo;Jewish&rdquo; are in play. The Soviet classification system of nationalities is key to understanding Jewish identity in Kazakhstan: during the Soviet Union through today, to be a Jew is to be considered a part of the Jewish nation noted on one&rsquo;s passport. In Kazakhstan, &ldquo;Jewish&rdquo; is not necessarily a religious classification.</p>
<p>Although religion and ethnicity are uniquely intertwined in Judaism, in Kazakhstan&rsquo;s atmosphere of multicultural pride, the cultural aspect has more resonance than religious appeals. The country&rsquo;s majority is Muslim, and there is a sizeable Russian Orthodox Christian minority. When people talk about divisions, it is rarely on religious grounds; the focus is on nationalities. Surrounded by neighbors that have a record of extreme nationalism and lack of respect for minority rights, most Kazakhstanis proudly point to the over 100 nationalities that live within the country&rsquo;s borders.</p>
<p>The Soviet-era delineations and the Kazakhstani multicultural drive have certainly led to greater assimilation. Friendships across national groups are the norm. Young people are exposed to a world larger than the city and, when possible, they travel, but they retain national identity. Young Jews strive to have a basic knowledge about Judaism, and often gain this from their families or from Jewish education programs, run by Jewish cultural centers, the Jewish Agency, and in a few cities, Chabad. When a Jew is asked about his or her nationality, there is usually no hesitation to say, &ldquo;I am Jewish.&rdquo;</p>
<p>This means of identification might change. Across Kazakhstan, <em>Heseds</em> are growing and young people are slowly reconnecting with Judaism, although connecting with university students and young adults continues to be challenging. A number of Jewish organizations and individuals are influential nationally and locally. A few times a year, the national organizations organize large nationwide celebrations, staff training and development, and religious education. While growth may be slow in some cities across this huge country, the development of the Jewish community in the big cities is energetic, and the future of the Jewish community in Kazakhstan looks bright.</p>
<p><em>Perry Teicher is serving a two-year tour as a Peace Corps Volunteer, based in Aktobe, Kazakhstan.</em><em> </em></p>
<p><em>The views expressed here are solely those of the writer and do not represent Peace Corps or the United States government. </em></p>