---
layout: default
title: 16 Fellows About to Change the World: From Daring Shall Come the Reward
tags: [Features,institute,social entrepreneurship,PresenTense Fellows,magazine,philanthropy,PT9]
created: 1255870964
changed: 1258657994
---
<p>After Bernard Madoff and the economic recession,  as the damage to the nonprofit world was revealed  with cutbacks and the closure of social ventures and  foundations across the spectrum, we were asked  whether this was a good year to train and launch another class of  PresenTense fellows. &ldquo;Is it fair,&rdquo; we were asked, &ldquo;to get someone&rsquo;s  hopes up when even existing ventures can&rsquo;t stay afloat?&rdquo;</p>
<p>We recalled the story of Samson, and particularly his  confrontation with a lion on his path. Rather than fleeing from the  lion and near-certain death, our hero wrestled with him head-on,  and he achieved the impossible. After this mad battle with the jaws of  death, Samson was rewarded with the pinnacle of life: the sweetness  of honey. Samson later describes this in a riddle as mi az yatza matok,  literally, &ldquo;from power out came sweetness,&rdquo; or as we translated it in  this summer&rsquo;s motto, &ldquo;from daring shall come the reward.&rdquo;</p>
<p>In much the same way, our fellows past and present have been  wrestling with the ravenous economy head-on, unwilling to relent as  they fight near-certain death in order to bring new sweetness to our  community. This year&rsquo;s fellows have shown special bravery: as the  lion pounced, they did not back down. Rather, they ran forward to  devote six weeks of their lives to building their entrepreneurial skills,  so as to take on the challenges with new strength.</p>
<p>These daring entrepreneurs are our inspiration at  PresenTense&mdash;pioneers who break new ground in the face of great  uncertainty, and who work tirelessly to improve the world and  strengthen the Jewish People. From places as far as the West Coast  of the United States and the east coast of China, and as near as  across the street from the PresenTense Hub in Jerusalem, these  pioneers have gone through a rigorous training and refinement  process. They have clarified their vision and purpose, strengthened  their business models to maximize earnings potential, and built  connections with individuals and communities that can help  transform their ideas into reality. They were aided by coaches,  mentors, and skillbuilders, who gave of their time due to the belief  that there is a difference to be made in the world, and that these  fellows can make that difference. And they were supported by the  global PresenTense community, which will continue to champion  them and their ventures in the years to come.</p>
<p>In this publication you will catch a glimpse of their stories,  values, and visions for the future. We hope you not only enjoy  getting to know the fellows and the Institute that is driving them  forward&mdash;but that you also will find a venture or idea that inspires  you. If you are so moved, we hope you will join them as they wrestle  their challenges to the ground and harvest the sweet success of a  problem solved for our community and our world.</p>