---
title: A Million Points of Light
subhead: The growing potential of online giving
issue: 15
author: ['Tova Serkin']
section: Features
article_image: http://presentense.org/files/pt9_serkin.jpg
tags:
- philanthropy
---

<p>Never has your 18 dollars been   worth so much.</p>

<p>The way donors and   nonprofit organizations   relate to each other has changed drastically   over the last few years, putting more power   into the hands of every individual. Last   year&rsquo;s economic crises have brought these   changes into sharp relief, as fewer donors   have funds to spare and many organizations   struggle to survive.</p>

<p>Globalization, the growing influence of   social media, and the unparalleled success   of Barack Obama&rsquo;s presidential campaign   have led to an increased focus on the social   impact of giving, and therefore a growing   democratization of philanthropy. While   these changes may sound appealing for   potential donors, not everyone views these   trends positively. They create new challenges,   particularly for organizations and potentially   for society at large. The Jewish community   is faced with these new realities as well, and   must similarly respond if it is to successfully   reach its fundraising goals.</p>

### Valuing Every Cent

<p>Consumers have grown used to   seemingly endless choices and comparison   shopping to find the best deals. So too,   today&rsquo;s donors want value for their dollar&mdash;   social value. They want to understand what   exactly their contributions will accomplish   and to make informed decisions. If, once   upon a time, organizations were able to raise   funds simply by explaining the important   causes they serve, today they must be able   to pinpoint the exact impact of any given   donation. &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t just buy a cup of coffee   anymore,&rdquo; explains John Hecklinger, Chief   Program Officer for <a href="http://www.globalgiving.com/">GlobalGiving</a>, an   online giving site. &ldquo;If you like, you can have   a cup of free trade coffee from a particular   town in Guatemala. People expect an   experience when they spend money on   products, and the same is increasingly true   for donations.&rdquo;</p>

<p>The shift towards high-impact gifts   has made giving more attractive for younger   donors and those who can only make small   donations. When a donor knows that even   his or her 10 dollars counts and can make a   concrete difference, he or she is more likely   to reach for the wallet. Jeremy Goldberg, a   former Obama campaign fundraiser and   nonprofit consultant, points out that this   individualized approach requires engaging   donors by providing them with information   and soliciting their input, not just asking for   money, no matter how small the amount.   The Obama campaign did so brilliantly, he   explains, because it gave individuals a sense   of ownership.</p>

<p>These smaller donations will be given   via the internet, according to a 2006 study   by DonorCentrics. The last 10 years have   seen explosive growth in online giving.   In 1999, just $200 million was donated   online, but by 2007 that number had   reached $10.44 billion in the United   States alone&mdash;a growth of 5200 percent.   Globally, this number is estimated at over   $20 billion. Still, it is important to note   that this number represents just 3.4 percent   of all giving; most money is still donated   offline (Ted Hart and Harvard University,   Initiative on Social Enterprise, 2007). The   millions of online donors may represent   a high number of people giving money   today, but they do not yet account for a   significant proportion of the money going   to social causes.</p>

<p>When small donations are pooled   together, then of course the social impact   of each gift is magnified. Over the last few   years, a number of websites have provided   an outlet for the general public to make   small or medium-sized donations. Sites   like <a href="http://www.globalgiving.com/">GlobalGiving</a>, <a href="http://www.donorschoose.org/">DonorsChoose.org</a>,   <a href="http://www1.networkforgood.org/">Network for Good</a>, <a href="http://www.razoo.com/">Razoo</a>, and <a href="http://www.justgiving.com/">JustGiving</a>   have enabled individuals to target and   personalize their giving online in ways that   were never possible before.</p>

### And in the Jewish world?

<p>Jewish and Israeli organizations,   some of which suffered drastic losses in   last year&rsquo;s economic downward spiral   and the Bernard Madoff scandal, are,   by many accounts, behind others in the   nonprofit sector in responding to the   trends. In recent years, very little effort   has been made to reach small donors,   and many have not fully leveraged the   online options to engage more supporters.   &ldquo;Jewish organizations are particularly donors because they simply have never   needed to do so until now,&rdquo; Goldberg   explains. &ldquo;The expertise required to   reach this population is not the same   as cultivating mega-donors, and many   organizations are not wired for this   kind of work.&rdquo; It is not surprising, many   say, given the unique nature of the   Jewish community. In a recent speech   in Jerusalem, Jeff Solomon, President   of the Andrea and Charles Bronfman   Philanthropies, pointed to the strong   notion of community among Jews,   coupled with the unwelcoming attitude   of American high society toward Jews   in the early to mid-20th century, that   led to the Federation system&rsquo;s reliance   on a small group of mega-donors.   He explained that philanthropists   would give to the community, and the   community would decide how to allocate   the funds.</p>

<p>Today, some organizations have   begun to take steps to engage smaller   donors online, placing new donation   components on their websites, and   using social media, such as Facebook   and Twitter, to reach more donors. For   example, instead of holding its annual   dinner, Hillel celebrated its 85th birthday   with a virtual banquet with video and   conference calls that engaged potential   supporters globally and encouraged   gifts of all sizes. Even Federations have   introduced online giving to their websites,   and many, including Boston, Colorado,   and Los Angeles, have introduced tools   to help donors understand the value of   their donations&mdash;starting from 18 dollars.   Some Israeli and Jewish organizations   have begun to leverage existing   fundraising sites, and most recently,   JGooders.com was launched to serve as an   online giving platform specifically for the   Jewish and Israeli nonprofit sectors.</p>

### Looking to the Future

<p>Within the Jewish community, some   community leaders are concerned about   the impact of highly-targeted giving and   the increased focus on narrow projects.   They argue that it puts the community   at risk because it reduces the sense of   interconnectedness. &ldquo;The emotion of   community is lost,&rdquo; said Solomon, &ldquo;Donors   would put a chip in their checks to follow   them if they could.&rdquo; Furthermore, critical   but less &ldquo;sexy&rdquo; funds, like the ongoing   support of community services, may   struggle for funding when competing   with new and exciting projects for each   individual&rsquo;s donation. Jewish Federations,   some point out, are able to make sure that   all community needs are met, regardless of   individual interests.</p>

<p>Another challenge is the difficulty of   creating a sustainable base of online, small   gift donors. Turning a first-time $18 or $36   gift into a monthly or even annual donation,   and then long term into a larger contribution,   is especially challenging online, where it is   more difficult to engage people personally   and use traditional methods for cultivating   supporters. The Obama campaign, and   political fundraising in general, has a natural   deadline that creates a sense of urgency for   donors. Nonprofit organizations, on the   other hand, can only run so many emergency   campaigns to create that sense of immediacy.</p>

<p>Since most young people, Jewish and   non-Jewish, are interested in these small,   directed gifts, Jewish organizations must   contend with young Jews who will go   elsewhere if the organized Jewish community   does not meet their needs. To keep them   engaged in social causes, and to cultivate   them to be the large donors of tomorrow,   Jewish organizations will need to embrace   these trends to compete with other non-   Jewish causes that give them what they want   in a donation experience. &ldquo;Jewish and Israeli   organizations must recognize the growing   importance of small donors and engage them   accordingly,&rdquo; says Ronit Dolev, co-founder   of <a href="http://www.jgooders.com/">JGooders.com</a>. &ldquo;While this model will   not replace classic philanthropy, it will not   only raise critical supplementary funds for   organizations, but it will engage a broader   base of younger donors, future donors, in   their work. This will strengthen both the   nonprofit sector and the Jewish People.&rdquo;</p>

<p>Back in 2002, researchers at Harvard   University estimated that by 2010, one-third   of all donations would be made online. With   just a few months to go, it seems unlikely   that we will reach this mark. But it is clear,   says GlobalGiving&rsquo;s Hecklinger, that as   Generations X and Y get older and have   more capacity to give, a higher proportion of   donations will be made online. &ldquo;People aren&rsquo;t   going to abandon major solicitations, and in   absolute terms of revenue this will continue   to be the primary source,&rdquo; claims Goldberg,   &ldquo;but the majority of donors will be those   who give smaller amounts.&rdquo; Organizations   are quickly learning to adapt to the new   realities and donors today have more choice   and control than ever. While philanthropy   may have become more accessible, it remains   to be seen if the impact on the Jewish   community and the nonprofit sector will   be positive. One thing is for certain&mdash;the   change you find under your sofa is becoming   more valuable by the minute.</p>
