---
layout: default
title: Abroad But At Home: Israelis in San Francisco Await Their Return
tags: [Arts,magazine,PT5]
created: 1257274013
changed: 1257274013
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Yoav, born in Israel, moved to California with his parents as a child. Though his first years in school were difficult, he later integrated well into American society. Yoav enjoyed Israeli youth movement activities, always dated Jewish women, and married a Jewish woman. He defines himself as &ldquo;Israeli&rdquo; and says that his being Jewish is not his primary identity&mdash;but only a component of his being Israeli.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Through the accounts of Israelis who live in the San Francisco Bay area,&nbsp;<em>Arai&rsquo;im Ve&rsquo;kvuim</em>&mdash;Permanent and Temporary&mdash;by Roni Floman, opens to us a world of life stories, full of strong emotions and experiences. The interviewees expose their past and present lives, both the happy and the unpleasant. To give us a deeper understanding of the dilemmas revealed in the stories, Floman tells her own story: she lived in California for seven years, until she decided to return to Israel. She then reviews the research on Israeli immigrants, as well as on immigration in general.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The interviews portray how Israelis take up residence in the United States for various reasons. In the San Francisco Bay Area, where these stories take place, many come for high-tech careers. Others come to study at prestigious universities. And, of course, some seek a different, more supportive culture, not feeling in place in Israel.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Despite their different reasons for being in San Francisco, each person is conflicted to various degrees about being in the United States. Most of those interviewed, even those she categorizes as &ldquo;permanent,&rdquo; say that they want to return to Israel or are keeping the option open. Some claim they want to stay in order to apply for citizenship, then return. A common dilemma is deciding whether their children will be raised as Israelis or as Americans, and whether to educate them to return to Israel and serve in the army.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Much of the conflict stems from the fact that Jewish life in the United States is very different from Jewish life in Israel. Floman shows us how Israelis in the Bay area may make a conscious decision to live a Jewish life by enrolling their children in Jewish day schools, sending them to Israeli youth movement activities, or getting involved in a Jewish community center. They are also faced with the dilemma of whether to join a synagogue&mdash;a relatively unforeseen dilemma, considering that in Israel even secular Israelis would not do so&mdash;feeling that just living in Israel leads to a life filled with Jewish content. For them, when in Israel, being Jewish is expressed by walking the empty streets on Yom Kippur, taking part in a Seder meal with family and feeling free to practice any Jewish ritual&mdash;anytime, anywhere.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">It is difficult for Israelis in America to come to terms with the dissonance between their Israeli identity and the lives they live in the United States. Identity in Israel is often found in the hardships of life and in the obligations to friends, family, country, and even to the human race. Identity in Israel is found in knowing that Israelis may live together, but might never agree; accepting, as a people, &ldquo;the honey and the sting,&rdquo; as the poet Naomi Shemer once sang.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In Israel, Jewish identity is woven into the religious education system, pre-army academies for social leadership, and elite military service in the IDF. Israeli soldiers dodge bullets and lose their friends, and many would do it over again&mdash;all because it is at the core of who they are. But this supporting structure, and this sense of obligation, is lost to many Americans.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">With this apparent lack, it is hard for Israelis in the United States to know which country they will end up living in. Since both countries have different sets of benefits and drawbacks, one could practically live in either place&mdash;all the while unable or unwilling to forget one&rsquo;s Israeli past. As such, when observing those who live in California from a distance, it may appear that they have integrated into American society. Yet through their own words we learn that they remain &ldquo;Israeli,&rdquo; and, therefore, distinct. It may appear that they do not have a sense of Jewish identity, yet for them, what makes them Israeli also makes them Jewish. This identity is not about where they live; rather, it is where they are from. And this emphasis on their roots is especially more sharp since they come from a country that, for 2,000 years, their people have longed to have.</span>&nbsp;</p>