---
layout: default
title: Aleph Bet in the Bronx
tags: [Arts,Teacher,Bronx,Public School,Night,Eli Wiesel]
created: 1244433392
changed: 1244433392
---
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">During the four years I spent teaching public high school in the Bronx, my students, who were predominantly black and Latino, repeatedly asked me one question: &ldquo;What are you?&rdquo; The tone of the question was never malevolent&mdash;merely curious&mdash; as my Caucasian skin tone did not immediately associate me with any discernible background. &ldquo;You know&mdash; what&rsquo;s your race?&rdquo; they would ask. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s your culture?&rdquo;</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">At the outset, I was told by a senior teacher to avoid mentioning any details of my personal life, including my religion. The prevailing M.O. among older staff members was non-disclosure; no one ever explicitly said why, but the implication was that declaring my Judaism might arouse some sort of vaguely defined disrespect from the students.</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">But 12 years of Jewish day school, followed by four years at a university with an active Hillel, had instilled in me not only Jewish pride but an almost fierce unwillingness to hide that aspect of my identity. For the first time in my life, I found myself religiously isolated; there were no Jewish students in this inner-city high school. I realized I might very well be the only practicing Jew that the kids had ever encountered, and that the onus was upon me to serve as a sort of representative.</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">So, I answered truthfully: &ldquo;I&rsquo;m Jewish.&rdquo;</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">&ldquo;Oh. You celebrate Hanukkah instead of Christmas,&rdquo; they would inevitably reply. To my surprise and delight, none of them ever seemed remotely fazed. Save for completely earnest questions about whether it was true that all Jews were rich&mdash;to which I responded by passing a particularly disheartening paystub around the classroom&mdash;I never encountered any of the prejudice that I had expected. In a school where stereotypes were rampant&mdash;I often found myself trying to dispel their assertions that white, black, or Latino people always behaved in certain ways&mdash;it seemed miraculous to me that they were so openminded about Judaism.</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">Moreover, the students were fascinated by every aspect of my Jewish identity: anything from why Jews celebrated the Sabbath on Saturday, to how one learned to read the Torah at bar mitzvah age, to what their names would look like spelled in Hebrew characters, was fair game for endless questions. Their favorite stall tactic when they knew I was about to give them written work was to ask, &ldquo;Hey, how would you say this word in &lsquo;Jewish language&rsquo;?&rdquo;</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">&nbsp;In light of their curiosity about Judaism, I decided they should know something about recent Jewish history. I added Elie Wiesel&rsquo;s memoir <i>Night</i> to their booklist.</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">When I told the students we would be reading about the Holocaust, one of them announced excitedly, &ldquo;Oh, Miss, I love the Holocaust!&rdquo; Then she immediately looked horrified and said, &ldquo;Oh my gosh, that came out wrong . . .&rdquo;</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">&ldquo;I get what you mean&mdash;it&rsquo;s kind of morbidly fascinating, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo; I told her.</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">We read the book aloud in class so that I could explain key religious and historical terms. The students unanimously pronounced it the best book they had ever read.</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">&ldquo;Why do you guys like this book so much?&rdquo; I asked them. &ldquo;Because it&rsquo;s real,&rdquo; they told me. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s about bad things people do to each other.&rdquo; They offered gang violence, brutality perpetrated by white supremacists, and the genocide in the Sudan as latter day counterparts. &ldquo;Like, we weren&rsquo;t in the Holocaust,&rdquo; one of them said, &ldquo;but we know about hate. And this book . . . it&rsquo;s mad sad . . . but it tells it straight, you know?&rdquo;</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">One young man tentatively asked, &ldquo;Miss, we were all wondering . . . do you ever not want to talk about the Holocaust, since you&rsquo;re Jewish, and it was your family who died?&rdquo; The question touched me, not only because of the implied concern for my feelings, but because it showed so much about them. A large number of the kids had experienced staggering losses due to violence, AIDS, suicide, and run-ins with the penal system.</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">I sat down and faced them before answering. &ldquo;I wasn&rsquo;t born yet when this happened,&rdquo; I told them. &ldquo;So I didn&rsquo;t personally know any of the people who were killed. Sometimes, when I think about it, I do feel very sad&mdash;but I also believe it&rsquo;s really important to talk about it. It&rsquo;s part of history.&rdquo;</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">When we finished the book, someone asked if Elie Wiesel was still alive. When I said that he was, they wanted to know if they could ask him personally what the Holocaust was like. So, as a class, we wrote letters to Elie Wiesel.</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">The kids had questions about everything: How did he find the courage to survive? Did he miss his father? Did he still feel angry about the Holocaust? Was he still Jewish? Did he still believe in God? And amazingly, Elie Wiesel wrote back. In a gesture that has made me hold this man in higher esteem than any other author I can think of, he referred to each of the students by name, and answered a great number of their questions directly.</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">The kids were stunned&mdash; no one &ldquo;famous&rdquo; had ever written them back before. I was elated, not only by the formative educational experience this had been for them, but because it served as a culmination of the more informal lesson I had been trying to teach them: the importance of learning about other cultures, and being proud of one&rsquo;s own.</div>
<div style="margin: 0in 0in 10pt">When I left the Bronx in order to attend graduate school, I found myself missing the kids and our conversations. To date, I am writing a book about my students and the &ldquo;culture shock&rdquo; of being a young Jewish teacher in the inner city. My experience was profoundly affecting: there was a certain joy, not only in teaching the kids, but also in looking at my life and heritage through their eyes. Their interest in Judaism and, to a greater degree, their willingness to explore diverse cultures openly and exhaustively, were inspiring; they demonstrated what is possible when we see each other in a light of curiosity and unconditional positive regard.</div>