---
layout: default
title: America's Tel Aviv
tags: [Around the World]
created: 1250886057
changed: 1250886057
---
<p>When 35-year-old hairstylist Gil Adulami arrived in Miami for the first time back in 1998, he wasn&rsquo;t very excited about visiting. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not a beach person, and Miami wasn&rsquo;t the kind of place that really crossed my mind very much. I flew in from New York to visit my aunt, but I ended up really liking it.&rdquo; With Zohan-like flair, he adds, &ldquo;I thought it would be a bunch of old people down here, but it&rsquo;s more like a 24-hour party.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Ten years later, Gil is still here.</p>
<p>He wasn&rsquo;t the first Israeli&mdash; and certainly not the first Jew&mdash;to be seduced by South Florida. Economic opportunity, balmy breezes, and wide open spaces lured many Jews to Miami after World War II, and the community has remained visible and vibrant ever since. Miami, and its tri-county region, currently has the second-largest number of Jews (563,000) and the third-largest Israeli population (estimated at 30,000 to 50,000) in the United States.</p>
<p>Today, you would be hard-pressed to find the Jewry of yore in Miami&rsquo;s South Beach neighborhood, a former Jewish epicenter once known as the &lsquo;Shtetl by the Sea.&rsquo; Rocking chairs have been replaced by roller blades, and &lsquo;fo&rsquo; shizzle my nizzle&rsquo; is about the closest thing you&rsquo;ll hear to Yiddish. The decline was due mostly to elderly Jews dying or getting priced out after the city&rsquo;s Art Deco revival, and also to migration to Broward and Palm Beach counties as Greater Miami became more Hispanic. But it is not only the community&rsquo;s location that has changed; its demography is changing, too.</p>
<p>The word on the street is that a considerable number of foreign Jews are choosing Miami over Israel as a place to live and, especially, to raise families. The reasons: Israel&rsquo;s cost of living, perceived security threats, military draft, political tension, and the necessity for immigrants to learn Hebrew and adapt to Israeli culture. &ldquo;Among Miami-Dade County&rsquo;s adult Jewish population,&rdquo; according to the Greater Miami Jewish Federation&rsquo;s most recent study, &ldquo;31 percent are foreign-born, a number higher than any other Jewish community in the nation.&rdquo; This multiculturalism mirrors Tel Aviv&rsquo;s Jewish population, where 32 percent is foreign-born.</p>
<p>Notably, Miami and Tel Aviv share a similar aesthetic, boomtown history, temperament, regional significance, club scene, Mediterranean architecture, and lifestyle. &ldquo;Tel Aviv and Miami are very progressive, very vital places,&rdquo; says Shirley Kahn, a retiree and tour guide at the Jewish Museum of Florida. &ldquo;People are constantly moving and they&rsquo;re outdoors a lot.&rdquo; The vibe of Miami&rsquo;s popular Ocean Drive or Lincoln Road can be felt on Tel Aviv&rsquo;s Shenkin or Dizengoff streets, where outdoor caf&eacute;s and bountiful shop attract a wide crosssection of society.</p>
<p>South American Jewish immigrants find it easy to integrate into the city&rsquo;s Latin-flavored culture. European Jews, recently including a large number of French nationals fleeing renewed anti-Semitism in their country, find Miami attractive for the same reasons&mdash;it&rsquo;s America with a foreign posture, a caf&eacute; culture, and a tropical aesthetic. Speedos, topless beaches, and an absence of motorbike helmet laws are likely to evoke memories of home, too. &ldquo;And the euro is so strong now against the dollar that they can afford to buy real estate, especially with the current housing slump,&rdquo; says Marilyn Levingston, another museum guide and retiree from New York.</p>
<p>As for the Israeli immigrants, Levingston isn&rsquo;t entirely enamored of them. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re too aggressive,&rdquo; she says. &ldquo;I tend to stay away.&rdquo; Shirley Kahn agrees, &ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s the way they grow up. They learn to be combative.&rdquo; Avoidance can be rather tricky, though, especially in neighborhoods like Weston, North Miami Beach, and Hollywood, where Israeli-owned restaurants, markets, and retail stores occupy much of the commercial space.</p>
<p>Ohad Soberano, a 40-something Israeli bed &amp; breakfast owner who relocated from New York to Ft. Lauderdale three years ago, says, &ldquo;Life for Jews in South Florida is very comfortable. For Israelis, it gives us the same feeling of the ocean that we enjoy in Tel Aviv, or Haifa, or Tiberias. It&rsquo;s not only the same weather, but there&rsquo;s also a similarity of lifestyle.&rdquo; In fact, with its tiled roof, lush gardens, and Mediterranean restaurant, Ohad&rsquo;s 13-room B&amp;B is reminiscent of some of Israel&rsquo;s cozier guesthouses.</p>
<p>On a negative note, Soberano says, &ldquo;Lately, though, I&rsquo;m more afraid in America than in Israel. America now is exactly like Israel in the sixties. Israelis are experienced when it comes to security, but Americans aren&rsquo;t used to the threat of terrorism, so it makes life uncomfortable sometimes.&rdquo;</p>
<p>The idea of <em>yerida,</em> of abandoning Israel, is not something that plagues Soberano or many of his Israeli friends. &ldquo;What America offers is benefits, and then most Israelis leave and go back to live in Israel,&rdquo; he says. &ldquo;Right now, I&rsquo;m here, but Israel is my home and I&rsquo;ll definitely go there to retire.&rdquo;</p>
<p>But a vital, multicultural Jewish community within US borders still holds more appeal for some Jews than does the equivalent within Israel. The benefits of America&mdash;warm weather, safety, and no military draft&mdash;make Miami a viable choice for both Latin American and European Jews alike. &ldquo;Not only is the Jewish community here big, it&rsquo;s getting bigger and bigger,&rdquo; says Soberano. &ldquo;I see a lot of people still planning to come and wanting to come. I see tons of them.&rdquo;</p>
<p>At the end of the day, if the craving for a little milk and honey should arise, El Al has three direct flights per week from Miami to Tel Aviv. The &lsquo;Gateway to the Americas,&rsquo; it seems, is also the &lsquo;Gateway to the Holy Land.&rsquo;</p>
<p><em>Terence Cantarella spent most of his early years outside of the US, living and attending schools in Saudi Arabia, Cyprus, India, Israel, Canada, and Egypt, before eventually moving back to the United States. He is now based in Miami, Florida, where he freelances for various publications.</em></p>