---
layout: default
title: Art of Zion
tags: [Arts]
created: 1250888307
changed: 1250888307
---
<p>AZionist artwork, Visionary Expressionism, is testament to the thin-as-hair wire of a balance&mdash;between the avant-garde nature of arts as a leading the way in politics and culture and art&rsquo;s flights of fancy as an expression of humanity&mdash;being frayed in the postmodern era. Zionism is a philosophy currently unpopular with those who make our culture across the globe. When culturemakers, such as the Zionist Five&mdash;Alan Kaufman, Polly Zavadivker, Thane Rosenbaum, David Rosenberg, and David Twersky, so dubbed as authors of an exhibit catalogue on Zionist art&mdash;come into collision with modernist and postmodernist philosophies, the clash that arises is not one that is particularly new. It is instead a very old one, one of exactly where to put fulcrums of l&rsquo;art pour art and avant-gardism, and when to defend the tenuous balances we&rsquo;ve chosen for our cultural standard bearers.</p>
<p>Trained in the Western tradition of painting, Kaufman&rsquo;s art echoes the surrealism of the likes of Dali and Mir&oacute;, bringing out their emotional ghosts. His works are planted in the technical worlds of Chaim Soutine, De Kooning, and Picasso, the great modernists of the 20th century. However, he refuses to stay in that world. These artists have been claimed by international schools of thought, such as Cubism, Abstract Expressionism, and Surrealism. Deriving their art from famous art critics at universities and magazines, their modernism was among the great achievements of the 20th century. In order to create their art, they took what was natively around them, and painted them in ways to escape the particulars of the world. They instead made art and art&rsquo;s politics into universal characters, rooted in the general experiences of humanity.</p>
<p>Kaufman&rsquo;s work is attached to the modern cannon much like leaves are attached to branches of trees: tenuously. Like leaves slowly descending in the fall, his works, grounded in the technical tradition of the modern cannon, have stopped asking questions about the individual&rsquo;s relationship with the entire world. Instead, they ask a focused question: &ldquo;What does it mean to be Jewish and Zionist?&rdquo; By doing so, he hopes to create an aesthetic that does not belong to the craftspersonartist of Betzalel School, nor the &ldquo;martyr-suicide of the Modernist Diaspora painter who has to sublimate his Jewishness,&rdquo; as Kaufman would say. Instead, it is a fully-formed Jewish aesthetic through Zionism, an experiment based off the cathartic experience of ridding oneself the psychological pain of the collective years in the Diaspora. He is slowly developing symbols that he can use to rediscover the pain that the Jewish people bore from a long Diaspora and the slow ingathering of the exiles. His haunted faces are the face of the universal style, yet they are of a specific circumstance. They exclusively reflect the world around him, and his people, and no other. The surreal ghosts of memory that echo through his paintings are not derived from his unconscious, or from the collective unconscious of Jung, but instead only from the Jewish soul, as expressed through Zionism. This is why they lack the kitsch of traditional &ldquo;Jewish&rdquo; art. They are merely forms to explore the meaning of the New Jew behind the Zionist self&mdash; which is why the art world acts in revulsion to them. The idea that the symbols of the vanguard can be culturally-specific are contrary to what everyone has done before. The power of his art lies in the sheer fact that some of us will understand more parts of it than others. An exploration of what makes us different kinds of people: The &ldquo;New Jew&rdquo; expressed in Zionism, which is why his portraits of our forefathers are not of old men, but of the non-strangers that walk on the streets of Jerusalem and Tel Aviv every day. Zionist art is trying to reclaim the Jewish soul.</p>
<p>The development of a Zionist Aesthetic is like any other story in art: someone starts the process of creating a new aesthetic, a new movement, and he is shut out by the art world. It remains to be seen if others will follow Alan Kaufman. But Visionary Expressionism starts the development of what could be a refreshing change in a world of art consumed by trying to reach sublimity or beauty via statement alone. He is joined by Polly Zavadivker in facilitating this change. Their goal is to create a community of artists who can grow from each other by fostering artwork under a new Avant-Garde Print for Zionism, Miriam Books (<a title="www.miriambooks.org" href="http://www.miriambooks.org/">www.miriambooks.org</a>). Its philosophy is to have the word &ldquo;Zionist&rdquo; as a less politically contentious word through the arts. This Fall, Miriam Books will be publishing the first-run catalogue as a book to be distributed on the web and in stores and have plans to assemble an anthology of contemporary Zionist art as the next book. What Alan saw in the faces of the Zionists and inside his paintings will spread into Miriam Books like a wellspring of water, and it will inspire a new generation of artists to succeed.</p>
<p><em>Shana Carp is a student at the University of Chicago majoring in Visual Arts. She lives currently in San Francisco, but is a native of Woodmere, New York. She has a tendency to cook too much food for Shabbat.</em></p>