---
layout: default
title: Blood Brothers: Masked Uncovers the Conflict
tags: [Arts]
created: 1255286892
changed: 1255286892
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Both Palestinians and Israelis have blood on their hands. In Ilan Hatsor&rsquo;s arresting and poignant play&nbsp;<em>Masked</em>, this image remains salient throughout the show&rsquo;s tense 85-minute performance. The compact yet incendiary work about what happens when politics intersects with family is set in the thick of the Arab-Israeli conflict, yet--unpredictably-- it doesn&rsquo;t admonish either side. Nor does it glorify.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Flooded with bright, unflattering light, the play opens on a dingy, sparsely furnished room with putrid yellowish-gray walls, blood stains, and sharp metal hooks. In this space, three Palestinian brothers will pace and circle one another like predators as they launch into a battle of will and words, unraveling an intricate story of betrayal. How fitting that the entire action of the play occurs in a slaughterhouse: a gnawing reminder of man&rsquo;s inclination to kill. The butchery is the workplace of Khalid, the youngest of the three brothers, and the determined neutral territory for the heated reunion of his diametrically opposed siblings: the self-righteous Daoud and the diabolical Na&rsquo;im.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">A bit of synoptical background to get you oriented: the brothers&rsquo; fourth sibling&ndash;a boy far younger in age&ndash;has been shot by the Israeli army at a Palestinian rally that the Israelis infiltrated. Word has it that a Palestinian traitor leaked information of the rally to the army, and all suspicions point to Daoud. To complicate matters, Na&rsquo;im has risen within a violent militant Arab movement that hunts down and kills any Palestinian with collaborative ties to Israel. In short, Na&rsquo;im&rsquo;s next target is his older brother.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Daoud takes temporary refuge in the butchery as Na&rsquo;im&ndash;who cares for his brother despite opposing ideologies&ndash;preps him with the sort of interrogation questions he will likely receive from the other radicals. As the brothers uncover information that mark both as potential traitors to the Palestinian community, a fierce anger builds based on tensions both personal and political. Israeli-American director Ami Dayan deliberately entangles the aggressive and malevolent threads of these scenes with threads of love and concern, until the room becomes a knotty web of conflicting, ambivalent sentiments that can only arise when family is involved.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">As militant compatriots of Na&rsquo;im&rsquo;s surround the butchery, he seems to want to both feed Daoud to the wolves and protect him from harm. Similarly, Daoud views his brother simultaneously as a radical whose militia has &ldquo;killed more of us than the Israelis,&rdquo; and as the sole individual who can save him. Khalid, sensitive and timid, is less enmeshed in the dramatic core of the conflict, though he proves integral to the story&rsquo;s surprising climax. His singular pursuit, it seems, is for his brothers to communicate&ndash;without hatred, without violence.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The dynamic three-actor cast infuses the play with tremendous energy. And though they look absolutely nothing like brothers, they all channel an admirable amount of heart and guts into their roles. Arian Mo&rsquo;ayed, who plays the vindictive Na&rsquo;im, seems to be carrying daggers everywhere: in his eyes, in his threatening gait, and in his words. Daoud Heidami, who fills the role of Daoud, occasionally suffers from over-acting but well exudes the burdensome persona of the oldest child weighed down by responsibility. Sanjit De Silva as Khalid gives perhaps the most touching performance as he imbues his character with an earnestness that is heartbreaking precisely because such sensitivity gets muffled amidst an angrier cacophony of his brothers&rsquo; hostility and rage.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The entirety of&nbsp;<em>Masked&nbsp;</em>is unique and impressive not only because it is a work written by an Israeli about Palestinians. It is also a work that&ndash;almost impossibly&ndash;depicts the complexities of the Middle East conflict without a single polemic that resembles favoritism. Hatsor&rsquo;s and Dayan&rsquo;s achievement is the acknowledgment that to polemicize is, by definition, to neglect. When arguing a particular side of a debate, one must emphasize the details that enhance one&rsquo;s side and neglect the details that don&rsquo;t. Otherwise, the only possible conclusion is that &ldquo;it&rsquo;s complicated.&rdquo; And such an understanding is precisely what makes this play successful.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">While the play expresses the idea that both Palestinians and Israelis are flawed, Hatsor doesn&rsquo;t finger-point. Nor does he offer any grand resolution or declaration of blame through the guise of dialogue as many political playwrights attempt to do. If a conflict is so intricate that it cannot be solved politically, why pretend that we can solve it artistically?</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In the director&rsquo;s note of the play&rsquo;s program, Dayan makes a large request of his audience. He writes, &ldquo;Please put aside preconceptions and political doctrine,&rdquo; presumably meaning, &ldquo;remove yourself from the mire of cultural stereotypes and ideological leanings&rdquo;&mdash;a tall order, indeed. But perhaps the least we can do is to contemplate a situation&rsquo;s complexity before assigning immediate blame to the Other; to recognize that no single polemic will ever define a conflict.&nbsp;<em>Masked&nbsp;</em>is a terrifically ambitious and moving work. It conveys poignantly and almost painfully that hatred turns men into butchers. How further complicated things become when the killer is of one&rsquo;s own blood.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; "><em>Masked&nbsp;</em>is currently running at the DR2 Theatre in Union Square in New York City.</span>&nbsp;</p>