---
layout: default
title: Boycott, Bloody Boycott
tags: [Here and Now]
created: 1254663801
changed: 1254663801
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">As Jewish students in Britain prepare to start the academic year, they are faced with a threat which many are struggling to understand. For the second time in five years, a British academic union is calling for an academic boycott of Israeli institutions, this time through the newly formed University and Colleges Union (UCU). The boycott is aimed at all Israeli academic institutions on the basis of, as stated in the motion passed at UCU Congress, &ldquo;the complicity of Israeli academia in the occupation.&rdquo; The calls were for &ldquo;members to consider the moral implications of existing and proposed links with Israeli academic institutions.&rdquo; The vociferous pro-boycott lobby argues that Israel is a unique evil in the world, and any action to oppose it is acceptable. Collateral consequences are, of course, irrelevant, even if that means increased hostility and anti-Semitism at British universities; to temper any such accusations, the motion added in one of the most worrying statements that: &ldquo;criticism of Israel cannot be construed as anti-Semitic.&rdquo;</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Many supporters of the boycott deny, perhaps legitimately, charges of anti-Semitism. Regardless of their motives, the effects of the boycott especially increased de-legitimization of Israel and an academic witch hunt will be felt most strongly by the Jewish community. The consequences are anti-Semitic, even if the intentions are not. It is Jewish students who are most likely to feel the adverse effect of reduced cooperation with Israel, and Jewish Studies departments are unable to continue offering their courses. It is also the case that where Israel is discussed in such a divisive way, anti-Zionism fast spills over into anti-Semitism, despite the claims by UCU that the line is not easily blurred. The decision of those unions with a boycott policy not to address this problem was exemplified in July by their refusal to meet the Organisation of Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) authority on anti-Semitism and German Member of Parliament, Gert Wiesskirchen. Refusing to address the problem won&rsquo;t, however, make it go away, and the UCU in particular has a responsibility to examine the issue, especially for the sake of those students who will likely be hit hardest: Jewish students on British campuses. Those academics who support a boycott can&rsquo;t forget the duty of care which universities are obligated to provide their students, the responsibility to ensure their welfare while at university.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In a campaign coordinated with the wider community and spearheaded by the Union of Jewish Students (UJS) of which I am a campaign director, students are expressing their displeasure at this latest action by some of Britain&rsquo;s academics. Working on the assumption that the vast majority of British academics won&rsquo;t accept such a blatant and unjust impingement on academic freedom, Jewish students have called for a referendum of all UCU members. National Union of Students President, Gemma Tumelty, also opposes the boycott, saying that it &ldquo;hinders the building of bridges between Israelis and Palestinians. Retaining dialogue on all sides will be crucial in obtaining a lasting peace in the Middle East.&rdquo; They have also received support from Universities UK (the organization which represents the presidents of universities). In addition, they have leading academics, including Professor Mark Pepys, Head of Department of Medicine; University College Medical School, on their side. When asked about the boycott, Pepys responded, &ldquo;all fair-minded and unprejudiced people, let alone academics in universities, must automatically reject outright the call for an academic boycott. It is a contradiction in terms and in direct conflict with the mission of a university.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In the immediate aftermath of the boycott resolution, over 200 Jewish students followed my lead as the Campaigns Organiser at UJS by sending mass e-mails to Sally Hunt, the head of the UCU, expressing our frustration. She sympathized, but has so far failed to act. Two students from Warwick have attracted over 7000 members to a Facebook group opposing the boycott, and have planned different activities for the coming academic year. Campaign ideas have been pouring in from both Jewish and non-Jewish students across the UK, from publicity stunts at graduation ceremonies to action at freshers fairs (student clubs and activities fair for new students). Either way, it is clear that students will continue to oppose the calls for a boycott once the academic year begins. Michael Harris, President of the Manchester Jewish Society, said &ldquo;for UK Jewish students attempting to build bridges and pressing for a just solution to the conflict, academic boycott is a shortsighted, discriminatory policy which will serve to isolate and deepen mistrust, when what we need are steps towards cooperation and collaboration.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Unfortunately, supporters of the boycott are not interested in an academic debate. As with much of the anti-Israel campaign in the UK, facts and reality are replaced by polemic and half-truths. The boycott campaign is no different. The debates proposed were meant to include only pro-boycott lecturers from the Palestinian territories (ignoring those among the Palestinians who oppose such action including the PA and Sari Nusseibeh, President of Al-Quds University). One suspects that if a similar proposal had been handed in by a student as coursework to those academics involved, they would have dismissed it as biased and unprofessional; but if the concept of academic freedom is being thrown out why not also sidestep academic rigor?</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The reality is that the call for academics to &ldquo;examine their moral compass in regards to working with Israeli academia&rdquo; is nothing less than a call for a silent boycott, a daunting prospect for those who dare to differ in their opinions on Israel. If the boycott is, in the short term, indeed silent, then it will be impossible for Jews and Israelis to know the reasons behind having a journal or PhD submission rejected; was it poor quality or poor politics?</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">As has been the case in Britain throughout the last few decades, Jewish students will no doubt continue to support the causes they believe are right and won&rsquo;t be bullied into staying silent, least of all by a minority of their own lecturers. In the 1970s and 1980s we heard that &ldquo;Zionism equals racism&rdquo; and saw Jewish societies across the UK being banned from campus. The Jewish student community only grew stronger and prouder during those years, just as it will today, facing this new threat from an old enemy.</p>
</span></p>