---
layout: default
title: Culinary Zionism
tags: [Arts]
created: 1250888045
changed: 1250888045
---
<p>A decade ago, when one would enter Rue des Rosiers, the main Jewish street in Paris, a new world would unfold. One&rsquo;s senses would be treated to a panoply of classically Jewish stimuli, from Hebrew shop signs to familiar Yiddish expressions. The sweet scent of freshly baked European pastries&mdash; strudels, blintzes, latkes&mdash;would waft through the air. One had only walk onto the adjacent streets to catch a whiff of spicy Levantine couscous and dafina, a Moroccan Shabbat stew similar to the more Eastern European cholent.</p>
<p>Today, however, one detects little of the street&rsquo;s earlier sensual diversity. The complexity of the French Jewish community has given way to a more uniform Israeli cultural experience. A street that once brimmed with culinary symbols of Jewish diversity now showcases only falafel and shawarma.</p>
<p>Some see the street&rsquo;s evolution as a representation of the Israel- Diaspora relationship, itself a oneway street. While Israel has come to see the Diaspora as a source of unconditional political and economic support, they argue, it balks at Diaspora Jewish culture. Similarly, Israeli food flows into France, but Israelis seem uninterested in French-Jewish cuisine and in the rich heritage it represents.</p>
<p>Yet Israel may not be entirely to blame.</p>
<p>When asked to define &ldquo;Israeli food,&rdquo; Diaspora Jews invariably point to hummus, falafel, and shawarma. The reality of the Israeli culinary experience is far more complex, however. Presented with the same query, a sabra (native-born Israeli) would likely describe a typical Israeli meal featuring Middle Eastern hummus as a starter, a Central European turkey schnitzel as an entr&eacute;e with Turkish eggplant salad on the side, and a fresh native fruit for dessert.</p>
<p>Israeli cuisine has not always been so diverse. Israel&rsquo;s first prime minister, David Ben Gurion, had a massive influence on the formation of Israel and its culture, an influence that extended from politics and into Israeli kitchens. Early on, Ben Gurion embarked on a campaign of Hebraization, forcing civil servants to adopt Hebrew names and reviving original Hebrew place-names throughout the country. Behind his obsession with making everything &lsquo;Hebrew&rsquo; there lay an adamant rejection of the Jews&rsquo; European past, which he felt represented centuries of suffering and humiliation. The early halutzim (settlers) found inspiration in their Arab neighbors, whose lifestyle recalled that of the biblical Hebrews. Shawarma, falafel and hummus soon became &ldquo;sabra&rdquo; foods.</p>
<p>But Theodor Herzl, the cosmopolitan founder of the Zionist movement, also had a hand in constructing Israel&rsquo;s cultural identity. Herzl felt that the Jewish state&rsquo;s identity ought to be created from a mix of existing Jewish cultures, forging, in Herzlian terms, a &ldquo;mosaic.&rdquo; Today, Israeli food closely approximates Herzl&rsquo;s vision, a model that is similar to the American melting pot: a cuisine in which blending of culture is taking place. Israel&rsquo;s food scene is eclectic and highly international, with cuisines that interact and blend with one another&mdash;like that of the Tel Aviv Asian-Latin fusion restaurant Kyoto Salsa: the name says it all.</p>
<p>Yet Diaspora Jews still see Israeli food through Ben Gurion&rsquo;s lens. And that is precisely the problem. Rather than representing Israel&rsquo;s view of the Diaspora, what we call &ldquo;Israeli food&rdquo; speaks to Diaspora&rsquo;s view to Israel. Diaspora views Israel through romantic lenses.</p>
<p>Israelis have found themselves faced with a dilemma: either ignore the Diaspora or accept it as a full cultural partner. They have made a clear choice and have both embraced and, to a large extent, adopted Diaspora culture as their own.</p>
<p>The Diaspora is now confronted with the same question. Rather than conceptualizing Israel as an abstract ideal, we must start seeing it in more realistic terms&mdash;a modern society confronted with many of the same problems as other societies around the world.</p>
<p>Recognizing the challenges of such a paradigm shift, I choose to highlight a recipe that could be easily prepared. Shakshooka, an onomatopoeic word brought to Israel from North Africa, means &ldquo;all mixed up&rdquo; and thus appropriately represents the new Herzlian model. In its classic form, the dish contains only three mandatory components&mdash;tomatoes, hot sauce, and eggs&mdash;but this version has a Mexican twist. Melding East and West, the Middle East with Latin America, this hybrid shakshooka represents the new Israel, and I hope its savory tones help you see that Israel in a new light.</p>
<p><em>Eythan-David Volcot-Freeman is currently studying at the Hebrew University and at the Shalem Center in Jerusalem</em></p>