---
layout: default
title: Eastern Encounters
tags: [Around the World]
created: 1250885827
changed: 1250885827
---
<p>Travel to exotic locations in the East has almost become a rite of passage for Israelis who have completed their IDF service. Whether it&rsquo;s India, Thailand, or Nepal, many Israeli backpackers spend months on end exploring these countries on their well-deserved vacations. In an ironic but not uncommon phenomenon, many of these Israelis and other young vagabonding Jews &ldquo;find themselves&rdquo; in this region and reconnect with their Jewish roots.</p>
<p>While the connotation of &ldquo;finding oneself&rdquo; is, by definition, intrinsically unique, the common thread seems to entail a religious experience on some level. This can range from rediscovering (or discovering) God to recognizing one&rsquo;s purpose in life and determining how Judaism and religious observance fit into the picture. &ldquo;I have many stories of <em>chiloni </em>(secular Israeli) backpackers who come here to holiday and end up returning to Israel and attending yeshiva there,&rdquo; explained Rabbi Yosef Wexlshtein, 26, head rabbi of the Chabad Center in Koh Samui,Thailand. Originally from Kfar Chabad in Israel, Wexlshtein has been on <em>shlichut</em> in Thailand with his wife and two children for almost four years. His Chabad House includes a restaurant, synagogue, Internet facility, and daily <em>shiurim </em>(classes).</p>
<p>The propensity towards connection with religion could lie in the breathtaking nature of the region. Many travelers to the East embark on treks in secluded mountain areas, where they absorb some of the most spectacular backdrops they have ever encountered. Shanee Fleischer, 27, a physical therapist born and raised in Melbourne, Australia, trekked through the Annapurna Region in Nepal as part of a year of travel in Europe, the UK, and Southeast Asia. She recalled reaching the summit of one mountain top at about 16,000 feet. She took a few moments to sit on the edge of the rock, literally above the clouds, and digested the panorama of the surrounding peaks. Such splendor often evokes a sense of awe, asserting or reinforcing awareness of a Creator, while making the subject feel insignificant within the grand scale of things.</p>
<p>But for Fleischer, and for many other travelers, it&rsquo;s about more than just the scenery. &ldquo;You&rsquo;re up in the mountains, away from everyday distractions like phone, TV, and e-mail, and you don&rsquo;t have to think about any of the day-to-day stresses,&rdquo; said Fleischer, &ldquo;For me, this is what caused such a deep impact.&rdquo; Being in such a remote location, with the company of just a handful of people and ample time alone, often lends itself to deep introspection and self evaluation.</p>
<p>The direct influence of becoming acquainted with Eastern philosophy, religion, and culture is another major, and perhaps most paradoxical, contributing factor. Inevitably, spending time in countries that are so devoted to religious practice will influence a traveler. While studying Eastern philosophies may potentially entice young Jewish travelers away from their roots, on the other hand it can also be beneficial for Jewish travelers to relate and contrast the ideas in Eastern philosophy to Judaism. &ldquo;Sometimes, after travelers explore the cultures here, they realize that what they know about other religions is far more than what they know about their own religion,&rdquo; explained Wexlshtein, &ldquo;And that&rsquo;s when they become interested in learning more about Judaism.&rdquo;</p>
<p>What&rsquo;s more, many young Jews who become more affiliated to Judaism in the East are often those that have responded to Eastern Philosophy. They sometimes come to recognize that the characteristics that they enjoy about Buddhism or other Eastern religions also exist in Judaism, and thus they reinvigorate their own religious practice. &ldquo;You can view donning <em>tefilin</em> as a sort of meditation or saying Tehilim as a sort of mantra,&rdquo; said Amichai Grossberg, 25, who became fascinated with Buddhism while traveling through the Eastern region for a year after his IDF service. Grossberg, who hails from Ramat Gan, Israel, is currently exploring New York City and getting a taste of Western culture before commencing his university studies in Israel.</p>
<p>Even for those that do not &lsquo;connect&rsquo; to Eastern philosophy, simply being among a deeply religious society other than their own can have an effect. For Israelis wandering outside of Israel, it becomes more apparent that simply &ldquo;living&rdquo; isn&rsquo;t a sufficient expression of &lsquo;Jewishness,&rsquo; and they grasp the idea that Judaism involves doing specific things which externalize their beliefs and identity.</p>
<p>Indeed, sometimes it is necessary to venture outside of one&rsquo;s comfort zone and to explore ideas from a different religious perspective in order to appreciate their significance in Judaism; and sometimes it is necessary to journey halfway across the world in order to discover what was in your backyard all along.</p>
<p><em>Sari Nossbaum is a writer who is originally from Melbourne, Australia. She trekked through Mount Chiang Dao in the north of Thailand last summer, generating her own &lsquo;Eastern encounter.'</em></p>