---
layout: default
title: Editorial: Israel@60
tags: [Features,israel,magazine,PT5]
created: 1257015617
changed: 1257015852
---
<p>How does our generation experience Israel at 60? For many Jews older than us, Israel at the ripe old age of 60 reminds them of stunning victories in the face of almost certain destruction, of new hope for a Jewish People emerging from the furnaces of the Holocaust, of a desert that was irrigated and made to bloom. But for many of us, Israel at 60 is different. Our generation cannot authentically share in the memories of existential crises diverted, or of the miracle of rebirth. We are the generation born after the great victories, and during a time of much more complexity and confusion. For us, this birthday presents an opportunity to explore what Israel means to us in the here and now&mdash;and what our role can be in shaping, advancing and improving Israel as we look towards the future.</p>
<p><br />
In this special Israel@60 edition of <em>PresenTense</em>, contributors as diverse as Israel herself seek to process the country's complex facets and effects in order to understand how we relate to Israel&mdash;and how Israel relates to us. Whether you are an environmental advocate (see &ldquo;REAL Housing for Real People,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Making the Desert Bloom,&rdquo;), a technological innovator (see &ldquo;Israeli Cars, Unplugged,&rdquo;), or a social activist (see &ldquo;Healing in the Himalayas,&rdquo;), Israel's contributions on a global level may move you to agree with the Ministry of Tourism's slogan, &ldquo;Israel: Who Knew?&rdquo; (see &ldquo;More than a Pretty Face,&rdquo;). Our relationships with Israel can be complicated as well. We disagree with each other about how Israel should be represented (see &ldquo;The Case Against Israel Advocacy,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Not Just a Holy Land,&rdquo;). Even as Israel may have been integral to our personal journeys and formulation of identities (see &ldquo;From Miami to My Country,&rdquo;), we have ambivalent feelings about the role Israel should play in our own lives. We must navigate difficult personal choices about whether to live in Israel or the Diaspora (See &ldquo;Next Year in Jerusalem&rdquo;,&nbsp; &ldquo;Going Down&rdquo;,&nbsp; &ldquo;Abroad But At Home&rdquo;, and &ldquo;Airfield of Dreams&rdquo;).</p>
<p><br />
As we publish these viewpoints, we would like to note that, even as we wrestle with what Israel means to our generation, Israel is just at the beginning of her own journey of self-discovery. After 2,000 years of living without a sovereign state, it will take the Jewish People time to fully understand the implications of self-governance. As such, Israel's existence is not a climactic conclusion, but rather merely the launching point into a realm of uncharted possibilities. Even after translating an age-old yearning into a vibrant reality, Israel, with all of its challenges and imperfections, continues to be a work in progress. By engaging with Israel as a platform for creativity and innovation, our generation can take ownership of our young State in a way that not only changes Israel for the better&mdash;but also adds value to our own lives. Perhaps, then, the question should not be how our generation experiences Israel at sixty, but rather how our experience of Israel will affect the State in the years to come. As the identity of our generation of young Jews emerges and develops, we, in turn, will help shape the dream of what Israel aspires to be, as well as the reality of its existence. So, happy birthday, Israel. We hope to check back in another 60 years to see what we have become together. Or, as they say in Hebrew, '<em>ad 120</em>!</p>