---
layout: default
title: Enter the Matrix: A First-Person Account of the Ethiopian Identity Crisis
tags: [Here and Now]
created: 1254603450
changed: 1254603450
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The first morning I woke up in Israel, I awoke to a new reality, yet my mother still called me Agnay, my Ethiopian name. As a boy, I knew that this name carried emotional weight, and that it mustn&rsquo;t be changed. Every time my mother calls me Agnay, she momentarily returns to Ethiopia; the village, our abandoned home, the midwife who died in Sudan on the way to Israel, the neighbors who stayed behind.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">But, as an Israeli, I was given a new name. My teacher called me Daniel, the Hebrew name assigned to me by the Jewish Agency clerk, while my friends nicknamed me Johnny. As time passed, these new Israeli names became meaningful to me as well. Although unfamiliar at first, they became evidence of my status as an Israeli, both in the eyes of those who named me and in my own. I&rsquo;ve become emotionally attached to my Hebrew name and it is now as much a part of my identity as my original Ethiopian one.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Israeli children of Ethiopian immigrants live double existences. At home, their parents continue as traditional Ethiopian Jews, refusing to give up the culture and rituals through which they preserved their Jewish identity during thousands of years of exile, even though the Israeli society outside poses different and usually conflicting demands. The clash between the two environments creates unique identity crises. Unfortunately, there are no adult role models that can help an Ethiopian-Israeli teenager navigate between these worlds. Israeli schools often interpret these teens&rsquo; behavior as juvenile delinquency, or African primitiveness.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Parents are equally unhelpful, feeling cursed by children who adopt the &ldquo;customs of the gentiles.&rdquo; Meanwhile, these teenagers are trapped between traditional Ethiopian family life and the complex Israeli society, one which demands achievement, money and chutzpah, without which they may forfeit their Israeli identity, as well as their social and economic prospects.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">I am forced every day to &ldquo;change the floppy disk&rdquo; of my personality and reload new software, like in the film The Matrix. Each disk contains its own scenery, characters, rules and regulations, and in each one I play a different &ldquo;self&rdquo; and navigate between diametrically opposed realities. Every time I come home, I enter my parents&rsquo; matrix. It is built on ancient dreams and centuries of faith; where modesty, respect and other classic Jewish values dictate the conduct of daily life. My traditional Ethiopian parents do not approve of my current lifestyle. I have learned to cover my tattoo, wear a hat over my haircut, remove both my earrings, and leave my friends at the door. My parents have their own vision of beauty, and my life seems to be a &ldquo;non-Jewish&rdquo; affront to their sensibilities.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Despite my many conflicts with my parents, I recognize how hard it has been for them to come to &ldquo;the land flowing with milk and honey&rdquo; only to be stripped of authority over their children, language, and culture. My parents continue to believe in the Zionist Dream, and despite the hardships that have befallen them, I think they will hold steadfast to these ideals until the day they die. In the short time my parents and I share over breakfast, I could never explain to them that my behavior, which they find so disturbing, is the manifestation of their dream. They would not understand that traveling on Shabbat doesn&rsquo;t make me a non-Jew, that watching MTV and soccer games gains me acceptance in Israeli society and that my earrings have no direct effect upon my grades. No possible explanation could satisfy their matrix, and arguments surrounding these topics only widen the growing gap between us.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In elementary school, the teacher was not pleased when my parents missed their meeting with the principal. It didn&rsquo;t occur to her that my parents are dependent on me to translate her note from Hebrew to Amharic. It was obvious to me that I should not translate any letter entitled: &ldquo;Your child&rsquo;s disruptive behavior.&rdquo; I did not dare further disrupt my parents' already shaky emotional balance.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">During my school years, I managed to maintain the equilibrium between these two worlds. Serving in the army cracked open the divide and the balance was lost. My commander didn&rsquo;t invite my parents to basic training graduation because his mother, a teacher by profession, told him that Ethiopian parents never respond to invitations. I didn&rsquo;t invite them because to get to the Golan, they would have had to take three buses and hitchhike at least four times. It seemed like an unnecessary ordeal, but I wish my parents could have witnessed the emotion of the Golani berets flying in the air at the end of the graduation ceremony, just like my friends&rsquo; parents. Standing now on the Israeli side of the cultural chasm, I know that I need to correct my commander&rsquo;s stereotypical thinking. I must also remind him and myself that the successes I achieve at this and all future graduations I owe to my parents who brought me all the way from Ethiopia to Israel, allowing me such opportunities.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">University was an additional test of my fractured identity. The professors expected me to bridge the educational gaps accumulated in culturally insensitive primary schools and I didn&rsquo;t want to trouble them with the social-economic complexities of my situation. They are not social workers and it is not their problem that in my home we do not write on the Sabbath, that we are eight siblings living in three rooms, and that there is no Internet access. Wanting to reach their standards, I was left with the following options; finding secular friends with internet access at home who wouldn&rsquo;t mind hosting me for the weekend, or staying in the dorms. The hard part is explaining to my parents why I can&rsquo;t spend the weekend with my family. Whatever excuse I come up with will be cold and brief. Telling them the truth, that I violate the Sabbath, is not an option. They wouldn&rsquo;t understand the complexities of my situation.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">So I play the &ldquo;Matrix game,&rdquo; switching between my parents&rsquo; world of tradition and religion and the Israeli world of technology, money and achievement. This matrix is the story of many first generation Ethiopian-Israelis, struggling to develop an identity that can exist in both worlds. Despite the hardships of the matrix, I remind myself that not everyone has the privilege of being at the junction between the &ldquo;old&rdquo; and the &ldquo;new&rdquo; Jew, between Africa and Israel, an ambassador of two cultures. As I encounter the broader Israeli society, I take solace in realizing that I am not alone in the task of identity construction as so many immigrants are creatively fusing their cultural past with their Israeli future.</span>&nbsp;</p>