---
layout: default
title: Feeding Israel's Hungry
tags: [Society,PT9]
created: 1261487111
changed: 1264087474
---
<p><em>For a response to this article, read &quot;</em><a href="http://presentense.org/magazine/feeding-israel%E2%80%99s-hungry"><em>Feeding Israel's Hungry:&nbsp;The State of Israel and the Role of the Nonprofit</em></a><em>&quot;</em></p>
<p>At first glance, there was nothing exceptional about the advertisement soliciting donations to feed hungry school children. Yet a second take infuriated me. An organization called <a href="http://www.meirpanim.org">Meir Panim</a> had sent promotional material to my college Hillel informing us about the large number of Israeli children who attended school on an empty stomach.</p>
<p>Fundraising for charitable causes in Israel was nothing new &ndash; our student group had raised money for JNF trees, Israel bonds (which were then donated) and Save a Child's Heart. Yet something about Meir Panim's solicitation was different.</p>
<p>This anachronistic ad carried vestiges of the 1950s and 1960s, when nascent Israel was indeed struggling to build itself while absorbing overwhelming waves of immigration and coping with security threats. There was something sexy about Diaspora Jews helping the hard-working, modest and poor Israelis who were building the homeland against all odds. Today, Israel is an established country with more secure borders and a vibrant economy. And while wealth, in its typical way, is by no means equally distributed, Israel on the whole is not poor; its GDP is on par with countries such as Cyprus and New Zealand.</p>
<p>Money is not the problem &ndash; national priorities are. Israel is ranked sixth in military spending, which consumes 7.3% of its GDP (after Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Jordan).</p>
<p>The settlement enterprise is costing the state more than its weight. A Peace Now report reveals that government funding to regional councils in the West Bank was 8.9% of the budget, while settlers comprise a mere 3.8% of Israel's population. A comprehensive report in 2003 by Haaretz estimated that the settlements were disproportionately funded over 2 billion shekels a year &ndash; for civilian expenses alone.</p>
<p>In 2007, <span class="t13">the government earmarked 82.5 </span>million shekels for ultra orthodox yeshivas &ndash; institutes of higher learning that perpetuate <i>haredi</i><span style="font-style: normal;"> unemployment and an inability to be productive citizens who contribute to the overall economy. The numbers have since shrunk, but still stand in the millions. Yearly, millions more are forked over to private religious education systems that are outside of state supervision and do not teach basic subjects like English and math. </span></p>
<p>Meir Panim&rsquo;s executive director, Racheli Ebenbaum, recognizes that &ldquo;the country earmarks most of its resources for planning, development and the military, while not focusing on rehabilitating the needy or eliminating poverty.&rdquo; Yet they &ldquo;are not trying to change the world, just feed those who are hungry.&rdquo; <o:p></o:p></p>
<p>With all their good will, and as great as this may sound to American ears, as an Israel I refuse to donate to campaigns such as Meir Panim's; they vitiate Israel by compensating for the state's mismanagement of funds and perpetuate the specious stereotype of an impoverished Israel. Instead, I will vote for politicians who pledge to distribute funds more fairly. I will protest, petition and donate to groups that aim to solve the problem at its root. It will be a painful process for society to undergo, but Israel must begin feeding hungry mouths, not ideological coffers.</p>