---
layout: default
title: Go South, Young Jew: Zionist Settlement Thrives in the Negev
tags: [Here and Now]
created: 1255009110
changed: 1255009110
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">While the second half of the twentieth century was a redemptive epoch for the Jewish people&ndash;one that saw the creation of the State of Israel, the pioneering of the land of the Hebrews, and the revolutionizing of self-identity&ndash;the twenty-first century has thus far been a glaring question mark.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Beginning in 1948 with Israel&rsquo;s declaration of independence, and continuing in 1967 with the establishment of a stronger foothold for Israel in the Middle East, Jews viewed the State with an aura of heroic messianism. During this time we witnessed the aspirations of the kibbutzim and moshavim for utopian livelihood while revolutionizing the concepts of socialism and cooperative agriculture. It was a time of overcoming, of developing, of pioneering, and of realizing practically miraculous dreams: the days of the dark-skinned Hevreh-man working the sacred soil, of &ldquo;making the desert bloom,&rdquo; and of watching the Israeli soldiers kiss the Kotel during the liberation of the Old City in 1967.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Back then, the word &ldquo;Zionism&rdquo; rolled proudly down and off the Jewish-American tongue.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">But today, the image of Israel and Israelis held by American-Jews is altogether different. Since the Six Day War, a new era has been steadily ushered in with the subsequent capturing of territories.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">What was up is now down. The ideas of a declining kibbutz movement, of a demonized army carrying out a &ldquo;brutal occupation,&rdquo; and of a generation of politicians marred by corruption and poor leadership have all contributed to a new image of Israel.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">If the twentieth century was the era of heroes, heavenly idealism, and self-fulfilling prophecy, the twenty-first century is the era of a stalwart economy, robust military, and a fully developed state. If ,in the past, the word &ldquo;Zionism&rdquo; so proudly rolled down a Jew&rsquo;s tongue, today it simmers hesitantly, and often sinks back down the throat with a sour taste. The idea of post-Zionism is not mere conjecture discussed in an academic setting; it is a reality in Israel and abroad. The association of Israel with high-minded concepts such as pioneering, overcoming, and continuous innovation seems to be disappeared from the Jewish psyche.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">But a new wave of pioneers in the Negev, Israel&rsquo;s southern frontier, gives the proponents of post-Zionism a run for their money.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; "><strong>Israelis in Action and in Need of Help</strong></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;Go West, Young Man!&rdquo; So went the phrase coined by John B. L. Soule and made popular by Horace Greeley as the watchword for the nineteenth century manifest destiny movement in America.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">According to Roni Flamer, CEO of OR&ndash;a movement dedicated to the development of the Negev and the Galilee regions&ndash;the spirit of manifest destiny is much needed in Israel, though in a different direction. &ldquo;Our slogan,&rdquo; he declares, &ldquo;is &lsquo;Go South, Young Man!&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">With more than 70 percent of Israelis living within the overcrowded triangle of Haifa-Tel Aviv-Jerusalem, and real estate prices increasingly expensive for middle class families, the impetus to expand Israeli settlement into the Negev Desert is commonsensical. Representing a total of 66 percent of Israel&rsquo;s land, the Negev today is home to a mere 8 percent of Israel&rsquo;s population. This sparsely populated and poorly developed desert land leaves much work ahead for the Jewish people. But a new wave of OR idealists and &ldquo;settlers&rdquo; have begun an impassioned surge to master it.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Since its inception and partnership with the Jewish National Fund (JNF) in 1999, OR has established five new communities in the Negev (Sansana, Givor Bar, Be&rsquo;er Milka, Merchav-Am and Charuv) and has assisted in the expansion of existing population centers. Over the next five years, Flamer predicts that OR will relocate 26,750 families to the Negev.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">OR&rsquo;s role in settling these families in the Negev, Flamer explains, is three-pronged: &ldquo;We work with housing, education, and employment to ensure a greater quality of life for our incoming families.&rdquo; Flamer believes that through economic, educational, and cultural development, the Negev will cease to be seen as a periphery of Israel. His long-term goal is to settle 500,000 people in the Negev. Currently, there are 13,000 families on OR&rsquo;s waiting list.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Flamer holds that if the calling to expand Jewish settlements into the Negev can be ingrained into the Israeli consciousness, large-scale development and growth will be possible. He unshakably believes that the future of Israel lies in the Negev. &ldquo;The dream of developing the land of Israel is far from over,&rdquo; he explains. &ldquo;This is the Zionism for the twenty-first century.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; "><strong>A Challenge for the Jewish People</strong></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">But the challenge of developing this region, thus far mostly overlooked by the Israeli government, is vast. Categorized as an arid to semi-arid climate, the Negev is no &ldquo;land of milk and honey.&rdquo; Its conditions led Mark Twain to describe it in his book The Innocents Abroad as &ldquo;a desolation that not even imagination can grace with the pomp of life and action.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">More than one hundred years after Mark Twain&rsquo;s foreboding words, visionary Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion issued a challenge to the new State of Israel: &ldquo;It is in the Negev that the creativity and pioneer vigor of Israel shall be tested.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Today, some are beginning to heed Ben-Gurion&rsquo;s words with innovative, cutting-edge projects. One of Israel&rsquo;s newer kibbutzim, Kibbutz Lotan, was established in 1983 with the intention of creating an environment that combines eco-friendliness with Judaism. Mainly identified as a liberal and Reform kibbutz, Lotan&rsquo;s central focus is to &ldquo;promote ecological building, waste management, and environmental education.&rdquo; Lotan is at the forefront of Israeli efforts to create sustainable development. Kibbutz Lotan was recently recognized by the global community when it received the 2006 Award for Ecovillage Excellence, the most prestigious award given to ecovillages internationally.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Located in the southern Arava region of the Negev, the pioneers of Kibbutz Lotan have defied Twain&rsquo;s curse. They have managed to create a thriving Center for Creative Ecology for the study of earth building, watsu, and wetland building. Kibbutz Lotan puts the rest of Israel to shame with its recycling habits and permaculture.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">So has the vigor of Israel taken root in the Negev just yet?</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">According to Udi Nathan, the founder of an ecovillage in Kibbutz Kramim, there are ample challenges to be dealt with as the Negev is gradually developed. For example, &ldquo;Ramat Hovav is an outrage,&rdquo; he complains, referring to a waste plant by Beer Sheba that emits a stench so putrid that the Israeli army had to move some of its bases due to complaints of nausea and sickness among the soldiers.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In addition, he says the Bedouin issue is a moral problem that the government should immediately undertake. Most of the Bedoins who were moved by Israel in the 1950s still live in cluttered villages plagued by utter destitution. Their water supply and sewage system are disgraceful and their electric supply is sporadic at best.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Nathan believes the development of the Negev is inevitable. &ldquo;It is the final frontier,&rdquo; he says. &ldquo;The question,&rdquo; he poses, &ldquo;is whether the government will use the desert solely for its military projects and hazardous waste plants or if, instead, the Negev will grow in an environmentally sound manner.&rdquo; Nathan has taken upon himself to be a advocate for the latter option.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">About eighteen months ago, Nathan proposed his project of building a &ldquo;green&rdquo; village within Kibbutz Kramim, located in the northern portion of the Negev. Comprised of only fourteen families and struggling to develop socially, Kibbutz Kramim happily accepted Nathan&rsquo;s partnership.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Today, along with sixteen new families brought in by Nathan, Kibbutz Kramim is on its way to becoming a center for sustainable development. Nathan jokes at the concept of &ldquo;sustainable development,&rdquo; which he says is practically impossible: whenever there is development, the environment is bound to be altered and sometimes damaged. But it is imperative, he argues, to create an efficient and eco-conservative community &ldquo;by building better means for water recycling, water collecting, and solar power.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">To Nathan, who is still in the initial stages of building the village, the Negev was the obvious place for establishing his community. With government incentives, cheap land, and a communal sense to build and grow together, the Negev is the place for pioneers to realize their dreams.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">While many in the new Israeli left have begun to promulgate the dawning of the &ldquo;post-Zionist&rdquo; era, it is clear that the State of Israel is far from it. With two-thirds of the country&rsquo;s land left sparsely populated and underdeveloped, the need for a new wave of Zionist idealism and the renewal of the pioneering attitudes of yore has never before been so dire.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">But the direction of expansion is far from obvious and far from the mainstream agenda. In the words of Roni Flamer, &ldquo;Go South, Young Man!&rdquo;</span>&nbsp;</p>