---
layout: default
title: Gringolandia
tags: [Arts]
created: 1255450065
changed: 1255450065
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">The piano bench was much colder than Noah expected. The last time he'd sat at a piano he had remembered it for weeks, from the way his calves ached from dangling. This time he could settle his feet flat along the carpet next to the pedals, his pant legs shifting upward to expose his white socks and the hair around his ankles. He pressed down on the balls of his feet and looked up at the square room around him.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">There was no comfortable space in the small den for the piano, not even an angle at which it was appropriate to place it. It stood in the center of the room, its black lid cracked, half of it dusty, the other shiny in streaks. Noah took one finger, slipped it under the keyboard cover and pushed upwards. The cover was heavier than he'd expected, and his whole hand slipped immediately under his finger to steady it as he raised and pushed it back. The piano had come from Noah's grandmother, Abuelita. Abuelita Dora, they called her to others. If he told someone about the newest addition to their home, this was how he'd have to explain it: the piano had come from Abuelita Dora.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">&ldquo;Lidia?&rdquo; Noah called out. He'd been waiting for his wife at the piano bench a good ten minutes, and she'd promised to come see the instrument right away.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">&ldquo;I'm here, I'm here,&rdquo; she said, coming around the corner from the kitchen and adjusting her belt. Lidia was forever adjusting her belt, forever making new holes in it to get it tighter or looser, more exact to the width of her waist. She did not smile when she saw the piano.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">&ldquo;Sure is big,&rdquo; she said. The maroon lines along the outside of her small mouth moved toward each other, closing the gap of natural lip color between the two lines of bright pink liner. The last time he'd seen that tight face was when he'd crunched fried, salted crickets between his molars and told her it reminded him of family. Noah looked up at her now and tried to smile, tried to focus his eyes on the freckles along the bridge of her nose. He tried to pretend he didn't see the tension in her face, the way a small smudge of red stayed at the corner of her mouth when her lips pressed together and then away. Noah's right hand slid forward onto the keyboard as if of its own accord. Two black keys fit neatly between his three fingers.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">&ldquo;I mean, we just don't have room for it,&rdquo; Lidia said. Noah swiveled his legs around the bench and turned to face her. As she shook her head slowly at him, Lidia's bangs dangled over her eyes and high forehead, as if the short cropped bits were teasing the rest of her dark hair in its slicked, smooth ponytail. Her hands were laced together, hanging in front of her just below her hips at the spot where her black skirt creased into itself under her small belly and then continued down straight past her thighs toward the floor. It had always struck him; the way that clothing could cut shapes and folds into surfaces that on their own were smooth and round. He had always been fascinated by those kinds of splits in bodies that clothing made, the places where low-cut jeans squeezed rolls out around women's hips that shifted and protruded when they sat. He pictured the way his grandmother's hips had turned outward when she sat open legged at this same piano bench.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">&ldquo;I thought you said you wanted our kids to play piano.&rdquo; Noah knew his voice sounded childish, disappointed. He wished he'd breathed in deeper before he spoke. He wasn't used to arguing with Lidia. Whenever they disagreed on something, he preferred to back down and let her have her way, whether it was with the curtains or the brand of the refrigerator. He looked down at the strips of brown paper in curling piles around the piano. He'd been too eager to open the package to throw away the packaging material. The piano had been delivered just after he'd returned home from work, just before she'd gotten home, and he hadn't even thought to wait for her to peel back the cardboard. He hadn't thought she'd mind.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">&ldquo;What I said was that I wanted our kids to play an instrument,&rdquo; Lidia said. &ldquo;One they could carry in a backpack would be wonderful.&rdquo; She came toward the piano as if to approach him, but two feet from the bench she pivoted and turned away. She made a firm fist with her small pointer finger sticking out, drew the finger in a careful straight line across the dusty side of the piano lid, then turned it at a right angle across the grey surface. She turned another, then another, and drew a square in the dust. It struck Noah that the foot-square spot she had drawn would be the perfect spot to put his music books if he still had any. The last time he had handled a stack of music books had been the last time he'd seen his Abuelita.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><em><span style="color: black; ">Mis pensamientos son masivos</span></em><span style="color: black; ">, Abuelita had told him then, My thoughts are massive. It was on his last trip to<st1:city w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Mexico City</st1:place></st1:city>, a year ago, when he went to tell her that he was getting married and she told him to take a piano. She had four in her small apartment in el D.F., and she was paying far more in insurance than could possibly make it worth it to keep them around. She could hardly keep them tuned. That was the trip when he and his cousins started to laugh at Abuelita to her face. Every trip back to the City had involved some form of joking with her, some level of tolerance of her made-up stories and out-dated opinions on minority groups. Their tolerance was down this time, and their giggling unhidden by polite hands. When Abuelita said antiquated things, they laughed, and she looked away. It had been years since she had the clout to reprimand them. She had always been too insistent upon her own opinions for them to actually engage her in arguments.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Once, soon after Noah had learned to drive, he'd picked her up in&nbsp;<st1:city w:st="on">New York City</st1:city>&nbsp;and driven her back to his parents' house in&nbsp;<st1:city w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Ithaca</st1:place></st1:city>. He was seventeen, and tentative enough in his driving that he was quiet in the car until she began to comment on the landscape along Route 13. Look at all the corn, she told him, there must be a lot of redskins around here. He'd tried to argue with her, tried to tell her kindly that &ldquo;redskin&rdquo; was not the polite term, but she was firm.&nbsp;<em>No soy racista</em>, she insisted, I'm not being racist. I'm just saying what they look like. Noah didn't feel like arguing with her observation of color, and he found it easier to stay in his lane if they drove in silence.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">On that last trip to the City, the only things that Abuelita said that made sense had to do with furniture and food. She rarely left the apartment in those days, and he could just barely picture the way she'd looked when she was younger, selecting nopales and hunks of queso&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:state w:st="on">Oaxaca</st1:state></st1:place>&nbsp;for the maid, her hands strong and sure and her fingers rough and red at the tips. Noah could just see the woman who'd officiated so firmly over twenty-person Passover Seders, with her crisply-ironed silk blouses, white knuckles, and perfectly-timed courses from soup to meat. It was nearly impossible to locate that woman in the abuelita who stood before him in her fraying blue nightgown and knee socks and seemed to talk more about the virtues of frozen food than anything else. The microwave oven seemed to make her especially eloquent.&nbsp;<em>Los taquitos necesitan el</em>de-frost, she'd say, the little tacos need the de-frost, and point him to the &ldquo;Defrost&rdquo; button. She seemed almost proud of the grey, partitioned containers that she crowed could be ready with just three minutes in a microwave on high. Perhaps it was the efficiency of frozen dinner that she loved, or its high saline content. The first time Noah feared for her mental state was that one afternoon when he came up behind her in the kitchen. She was smiling brilliantly at the neat puffs of steam that rose from a plastic bowl of microwaved picadillo and muttering something to herself about Abraham.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">&ldquo;<em>Que haces,&nbsp;</em>Abuelita?&rdquo; he'd asked her, &ldquo;What are you doing?&rdquo; and she'd whirled angrily at him, her face changing suddenly from calm to distraught, her eyebrows dancing.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">&ldquo;<em>Que haces tu aqui</em>?&rdquo; she'd yelled, what are you doing here? And, switching suddenly to English, &ldquo;This is no place for a young man. Sit outside. Go to the piano. Sit. Sit.&rdquo; And with each word she'd bumped up against him gently, the flag of her old woman arms directing him out the door of the kitchen and back toward the living room. He hadn't dared to go into the kitchen after that.</span>&nbsp;</p>