---
layout: default
title: Home Land Home Run? Baseball Makes Aliyah
tags: [Here and Now]
created: 1254600143
changed: 1254600143
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">It&rsquo;s the seventh inning stretch at Yankee Stadium and two rituals are about to take place, one ancient, one modern. Thousands of fans take advantage of the break in the game and rush to replenish their snacks and drinks, or wait in line for the bathroom. Meanwhile a group gathers around the kosher hotdog stand and begins to daven mincha, the afternoon prayers. Throughout all this chaos, the song &ldquo;God Bless America&rdquo; resounds inside the stadium.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Baseball is famously known as the American Pastime, but as America has changed over the decades, so too has the game. At its best, baseball displays the diversity, sportsmanship, and heroics that make the game&mdash;and America&mdash;great, but it has also served as a mirror for larger struggles. Once, Jews and other minorities felt a greater sense of acceptance in American society by seeing one of their own on the baseball field. Perhaps no one understands this feeling better than Alva Greenberg, daughter of Hank Greenberg, the legendary player of the 1930s and 40s, and the first Jewish player to be inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame. Alva Greenberg, who owns a contemporary art gallery in New London, Connecticut, reflected on her father&rsquo;s role in the history of the game during a recent interview. &ldquo;My dad was focused on the game itself, and being the best baseball player he could be,&rdquo; said Greenberg. &ldquo;But he was aware of his Jewishness and what he meant to the Jews in America. I think that made him a better player. He never lost his awareness that he was being watched, and that he was a symbol.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Times have certainly changed since Hank Greenberg&rsquo;s career, yet the baseball field continues to be a place of nostalgia for American Jews. When Shawn Green, proudly Jewish, and an accomplished player, joined the Mets in 2006, the New York Times ran an article titled, &ldquo;A Power Hitter. A Good Fielder. And a Source of Jewish Pride.&rdquo; The article might just as well have replaced the word &ldquo;pride&rdquo; with &ldquo;nachas.&rdquo; Like famous players before him, in the wake of his success, Green has not forgotten his roots.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">This summer, a new chapter was added to the history of Jews and baseball, with the inaugural season of the Israel Baseball League (IBL). The IBL&rsquo;s formula is a mixture of Zionism, business venture, American patriotism, and that familiar sense of having something to prove. The idea for the league started with Boston businessman Larry Baras, who spent two years raising money, seeking out facilities in Israel, and recruiting players. The IBL has been driven by the support of an impressive group of prominent names in Major League Baseball, including Art Shamsky, Ken Holtzman, Ron Blomberg, Dan Duquette, and Bud Selig, who serve as team managers or in other advisory roles. Daniel C. Kurtzer, a former United States ambassador to Israel and Egypt, is the league&rsquo;s commissioner.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The players in the IBL range widely in terms of age and experience, from recent high school graduates, to college all stars, to seasoned veterans, and hail from nine countries. There are six teams in the league&ndash;The Bet Shemesh Blue Sox, The Modi&rsquo;in Miracle, The Netanya Tigers, The Petah Tikvah Pioneers, The Ra&rsquo;anana Express, and The Tel Aviv Lightning. Some of the rules of baseball have also been modified to provide a faster-paced game. Games have seven innings, with ties being decided by a home run derby.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Although traditionalists might consider the IBL&rsquo;s incarnation of the game as &ldquo;Reform&rdquo; baseball, the new league is a fresh start, without the baggage of racism, strikes, and steroids that have plagued its American counterpart. In many ways it showcases baseball in its noblest form, with a diverse group of players, and an intimacy that does not exist in any American ballpark. Ari Alexenberg, a player for the Petah Tikvah Pioneers, described the scene at a typical game. &ldquo;The fans are enthusiastic, the adults bring signs and cheer, the kids chase balls and love asking for autographs. After the games, which typically end around twilight, I love to go into the stands, sign autographs and watch the sunset.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Still, the process of getting Israelis excited about the game will surely be a slow one, the players admit. &ldquo;Americans who&rsquo;ve made Aliyah come up to us all the time and say how proud they are to see us. They miss baseball,&rdquo; said Nathan Mittag, who plays for the Ra&rsquo;annana Express. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s been tough getting the Israeli crowd, but the TV coverage has helped spread the word. It takes a while, but watching is the best way to understand the intricacies of the sport.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Despite some efforts to appeal to Israelis, including instructive skills clinics with young players, it is clear that the games are largely geared towards American fans. The team names are all in English, transliterated into Hebrew on the uniforms, and the food stands sell only hotdogs and hamburgers. It would seem then, that the IBL is merely a slice of American life brought to Israel for the amusement of tourists and Americans ex-pats. While that is not entirely untrue, the politics behind the IBL also reflect the complicated relationship between the United States, Israel, and the rest of the world. In considering the worldwide spread of baseball, the IBL is another addition to an already extensive list of international leagues. Over the past 20 years, the number of countries with international baseball associations has doubled from 54 to over 100. These efforts are reflected in the make-ups of today&rsquo;s Major League teams, as more money and time is spent recruiting international players.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">But the larger question remains: why is it Americans and not Israelis who are thrusting Israel onto the international baseball diamond? Poor attendance at games, disorganization, and mediocre facilities reveal that the league is not an attempt to make money, at least not in the short-term. The creative impulse behind the IBL seems to stem from a need to teach Israelis about what many Americans believe is the best sport on the planet, combined with a desire to something good for Israel. By showing the world that there is more to Israel than the war and violence shown in the news, the IBL sends a message that Israeli families, like families in the US, have time to enjoy that most normal of American activities&ndash;a baseball game.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">For now, the players and fans seem content to do just that, making the most of the humid evenings at the ballpark. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m having a great time,&rdquo; said Joey Sherman of the Tel Aviv Lightning. &ldquo;I hope the league continues. It&rsquo;s an amazing sport in an amazing country.&rdquo;</span>&nbsp;</p>