---
layout: default
title: I Want to Hear My Own Voice
tags: [Arts]
created: 1250888563
changed: 1250888563
---
<p>As our world becomes increasingly globalized, many yearn for unadulterated glimpses into traditional cultures. With the opportunity to eat McDonalds in Jerusalem or have a Starbucks in the Forbidden City, it is often through music that we find a community&rsquo;s authentic voice.</p>
<p>Paul Simon&rsquo;s 1986 album Graceland sought the sounds of South Africa and propelled the group Ladysmith Black Mambazo and other native African artists into international fame. One hundred years earlier, classical composers had a similar longing to expand the traditional realm of Western classical music through the exploration of their own heritage. Aaron Copland turned to American folk songs, B&eacute;la Bart&oacute;k incorporated Hungarian peasant music, and Igor Stravinsky wove his Russian upbringing into his compositions. Whether motivated by a desire to preserve musical customs, assert the legitimacy of a culture, or simply reminisce about childhood songs, these artists sought to capture the genuine sound of their heritage and integrate it with Western compositional techniques. Through such composers, these musical traditions have found a way into the musical canon. Yet despite the heightened interest in expanding the sound world and numerous successful Jewish composers and musicians, rarely have we heard classical CDs that celebrate Jewish songs.</p>
<p><em>Hebrew Melodies of the Romantic Era</em> presents the rarely played but rich tradition of Eastern European Jewish music. Isabelle Durin and Micha&euml;l Ertzcheid seek to preserve the voice of the Jewish shtetl and compile compositions from across Europe and Russia in this CD. Yiddish songs, liturgical music and Hassidic dance tunes are integrated with Western composition traditions. The result of this collection is music that is as intense and heart-wrenching as the Jewish experience itself.</p>
<p>The CD opens with George Perlman&rsquo;s aching &ldquo;Hebra&iuml;sch (Ghetto Sketches, num. 1).&rdquo; The violinist plays as if in dialogue with God, pleading for understanding and sympathy. At moments, God and the violinist seem to be in conversation, while at others, the violin yells changes at track four with George Perlman&rsquo;s &ldquo;Dance of the Rebbitzen (Suite H&eacute;bra&iuml;que, num. 2).&rdquo; The violin and piano engage in a dance that is familiar to anyone who has participated in Israeli dancing. The jaunty rhythms and bouncing melody are reminiscent of a hora. As the piano and violin melodies circle around one another, however, the mood becomes increasingly dark, first laughing with black humor and then grieving. At the end of the piece, the dance theme returns and pulls us out of our sorrow.</p>
<p>Although a few pieces on this CD provide interludes of energy and brightness, overall Durin and Ertzscheid have chosen to portray a dark and mournful picture of Jewish life. While they effectively depict the hardship and frustration of the Jewish experience in Europe and Russia at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century, Durin and Ertzscheid fail to portray the Jewish people&rsquo;s ability to maintain faith, humor, and a love of life in these dark times.</p>
<p>Furthermore, Durin and Ertzscheid&rsquo;s focus on 19th century Romantic music from Eastern Europe does not take into account the stories from Israel, the United States, and the Americas that have also been recorded. To be sure, the modern young Jew is curious about the shtetl as, for many, it is the experience of their great-grandparents. And yet, in focusing this CD merely on this time period, Durin and Ertzscheid render this album more an artifact than a work of art.</p>
<p>As musicians, Durin and Ertzscheid convey a powerful and evocative message. They play with a firm understanding of the traditions for which they speak, incorporating bent notes and quarter tones characteristic of Eastern European music. As producers, however, they paint an incomplete image. If Durin and Ertzscheid&rsquo;s desire is to include an authentic Jewish voice in the classical Western canon, they fall short of their goal. While they convincingly and beautifully capture the voice of suffering and tragedy that so frequently is the tale of the Jews, they do not offer us the voice of laughter, hope, and perseverance that is also our song.</p>
<p><em>Emily Isaacson is a Master&rsquo;s student in Choral Conducting at the University of Oregon. She has done research on music in Cuba, Sweden, and Estonia, and is interested in the role of music in society.</em></p>