---
layout: default
title: In the Big-Inning: Opening Day at the Israel Baseball League
tags: [Here and Now]
created: 1254663386
changed: 1254663386
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; "><strong>Part I: The Old Country</strong></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Being a spectator at organized sporting events never found favor in the eyes of this writer, who himself sports a limited capacity for attentiveness. I had a hard time remembering the rules, and was ophthalmologically incapable of tracking the one guy holding the ball along with the several guys who are not. The lens through which I interpret most sports news may as well be labeled as &ldquo;ooh, pretty colors.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">But baseball I got&mdash;or so I thought. The rules and on-the-field dynamics of baseball were relatively simple, since fly balls allowed me just enough time to figure out who was in position to catch them. But at some point in middle school, my camp bunkmates surpassed me in their comprehension of baseball&rsquo;s &ldquo;finer&rdquo; points. When they weren&rsquo;t yapping about Shabbos walks, they would furiously engage in squawking matches, carried out in a distinctly nasal pre-pubescent tone, facilely flinging around decades worth of statistical jargon that seemed completely foreign. Meanwhile, I was left to lament my discovery that each team plays over a hundred games per season; I could barely remember the details of one.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Like the scrawny asthmatic kid at the end of the bench, I was having a &ldquo;put me in, coach&rdquo; moment, waiting for that avuncular slap in the tuchus to usher me back onto the field that I naively thought of as my own. Enter the Israel Baseball League.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; "><strong>Part II: The Redeemer</strong></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In a blue Mazda cruising modestly from Yerushalayim to Petah Tikvah and filled with olim from Detroit, the discussion inevitably turned to the Tigers&rsquo; surprisingly good performance this year.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;I can&rsquo;t root for the Tigers,&rdquo; I declared stubbornly. &ldquo;They let me down for my entire childhood.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;Aww, Come on,&rdquo; said Ari. &ldquo;Where&rsquo;s your sense of redemption?&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s invested in my religion, not some team that let me down for my entire childhood.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Despite my grouchiness, I had decided, in fact, to diversify my redemption portfolio a bit. This is why I was making the journey to the Promised Stadium, for the inaugural game of the Israel Baseball League. Some serious questions kept my itinerant mind wandering into the wee hours of the night:</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In what country&mdash;and over what entr&eacute;e&ndash;were these people sitting when this &ldquo;crock-pot&rdquo; idea was conceived? Having been selected by the Modi&rsquo;in miracle as the 71st and final pick in the IBL draft, would Sandy Koufax be relegated to a bench warming role? Would &lsquo;play ball&rsquo; translate to &ldquo;plaiy Bol?&rdquo; or &ldquo;Nu, kadima kvar!&rdquo; Would any native Hebrew speakers actually show up to this event? Would the IBL have its act together long enough to meet its self-determined golden benchmark of the 2009 World Baseball Classic? If so, would Jewish players from the MLB actually opt to play for Israel?</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">But above all else, I wanted to know: would the Israel Baseball League offer sanctuary for an athletically rough-around-the-diamond and inattentive spectator like myself? (The answer: yes, and I wasn&rsquo;t paying attention, could you please repeat the question?)</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; "><strong>Part Three: The Rebuilding</strong></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">I didn&rsquo;t need my one marketing class in college to help me figure out that the IBL was positioning itself as a family entertainment industry. A quick look at the Israel Baseball League website helped me set reasonable parameters within which I could set and evaluate my expectations. With some very creative charitable endeavors, talk of MySpace pages for players and mascots, and a section dedicated to cutesy biblical references ostensibly heralding the return of baseball to the Holy Land set the mood.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">While promotions between innings were promised on the IBL website, they weren&rsquo;t quite what I&rsquo;d expected. Some fans found it cute to watch their children play dizzy bats and try to run the bases, but the thought of a few nauseous tykes puking at home plate didn&rsquo;t carry the same appeal to me as three oversized sombrero-donning bratwurst racing towards home. Never mind that I didn&rsquo;t hear the announcer mention any giveaways for the winner of dizzy bats. Might I suggest free lice-shampoo for the lucky ticketholders in section&hellip;oh wait, there weren&rsquo;t any sections, just deckchairs and bleacher benches.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Another unexpected surprise was the announcer. The old chap, whom I came to refer to as &ldquo;Zaydee,&rdquo; quickly ditched the IBL&rsquo;s standardized baseball lexicon, calling the game in English, and saving his fresh-off-the-boat Hebrew for a top-of-the-seventh inning plea for help returning a lost child to its rightful owner. There&rsquo;s no criticizing a man who celebrates a hit by shouting &ldquo;bang, bang, bang!&rdquo; into the loudspeaker. Come to think of it, I&rsquo;d love to see my own Zaydee, may he live to 120, with his one glass eye, in the sportscaster rotation&ndash;he&rsquo;s definitely jovial enough to win over the crowd, and he&rsquo;s a cantor, to boot. And &ldquo;bang, bang, bang&rdquo; doesn&rsquo;t hold a candle to Bubbe&rsquo;s &ldquo;Utz!&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The real theme of the night, however, was &ldquo;a night of firsts.&rdquo; Forget for a moment the Petah Tikvah Pioneer who drove in the league&rsquo;s first home run. I was more interested in finding the first ballpark scalper in the history of the IBL. I saw several clusters of kippot srugot (handwoven yarmulkes) and baseball hats scatter to all four corners of the field to try and earn the distinction of first Ma&rsquo;ariv (evening prayers) minyan at opening day.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Hands down, the most pleasant &ldquo;first&rdquo; of the evening was the player-fan interaction. Lacking a press pass and experience in sports reporting, I doubted that I&rsquo;d make it down to the dugout to get the players&rsquo; perspective. Luckily, the players and fans were standing on level ground, players and personnel from all six teams were at the game, all of them fielding impromptu questions from anyone between the ages of 2 and 60 (the septuagenarians didn&rsquo;t seem to be represented). Some players were from the Dominican Republic, some were devout Catholics, some were friends of fans growing up. All of them, though, were congenial, approachable, and grateful for the opportunity to play pro baseball.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">All niceties aside, though, the record book of firsts will forever bear the tainted spot of the asterisk next to the &ldquo;first Ma&rsquo;ariv minyan&rdquo; award. Immediately after the 9-1 blowout by the Modi&rsquo;in Miracle, fans walked briskly towards the parking lot to try to escape an inevitable line of cars and the strange post-opening day sensation that they wished not to relegate to in-the-park catharsis. For many North American olim, and there were a lot of them at that game, there appeared to be a disconnect between the kid-friendly ambience on one hand, and what die-hard baseball fans were seeking on the other, namely, a game of baseball. One student sitting in a plastic chair directly behind the center field, a few feet from an improvised sandbox for two to five year olds, repeatedly said, &ldquo;this feels like a little league game.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In the future, the IBL will have to iron out some aesthetic and logistical problems: for one thing, the distinction between premium seating and general seating will have to be more convincing than four US dollars and a choice between a plastic deck chair or a wood bleacher bench.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">But I wasn&rsquo;t disappointed. I had gone to be a part of something historic, and maybe see a friend from camp, Rafi Stern of the Modi&rsquo;in Miracle, pitch in his first IBL game; he did, for one inning, allowing no runs with help from the Miracle defense. (See? I can pay attention for half an inning.) And as a bonus, I got to feel like a million bucks by chatting it up with players who, if the IBL does take off, might someday be worth that much.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">And so long as we&rsquo;re discussing redemption and rebuilding, could someone please cancel the Erev Tisha B&rsquo;av game next year? Granted, the IBL regards the Hebrew calendar with more sanctity than most other sports leagues in Israel. But to make Sandy Koufax pitch on Tisha B&rsquo;Av?</span>&nbsp;</p>