---
layout: default
title: Iron Lion Zion: Forging Ethiopian life in Israel
tags: [Here and Now]
created: 1254662932
changed: 1254662932
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">I wait for the bus to Mevaseret Zion. An Ethiopian security guard greets me, standard procedure at Jerusalem bus stops. The #157 arrives and takes me to the other side of the archipelago of hilltop neighborhoods that make up Greater Jerusalem. An Ethiopian family of seven walks towards the bus stop. One woman who might be the mother balances a large, heavy basket on her head, while a younger woman who might be her daughter or sister sends a text message.</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Mevaseret Zion, one of Israel&rsquo;s wealthiest communities, has a large absorption center known as a merkaz klitah administered by the Jewish Agency. About 1,200 Ethiopian immigrants reside here, the majority originally from the region of Qwara, bordering Sudan. They immigrated to Israel&mdash;known as making Aliyah&ndash;in the late nineties to forty identical two-story houses. Each house is divided into four apartments, and the yards below buzz with activity. I can see girls jumping rope; boys riding bikes; older men in straw hats chatting at picnic tables, and a mother braiding her daughter&rsquo;s hair. I can smell a hint of the spices used to flavor wat&ndash;a thick stew&ndash;and injera&ndash;flatbread. Behind the laundry lines that hang in every yard is the Castel, the strategic fortress seized by the Palmah&ndash;an elite commando force&ndash;in 1948. Posters for religious events and concerts fade on the street corners. On some houses, there is graffiti in both Hebrew and English.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Surrounded by the sights and sounds of this neighborhood, I meet my friend and former classmate Ganatu. Ganatu and I both immigrated to Israel over a year ago and went to the same Ulpan. Originally from the Gondar region of Ethiopia, Ganatu studied mechanical engineering in Addis Ababa. After his parents passed away, he spent over a year in a transit camp waiting to be transported to Israel. As a Falash Mura, a nominal Christian descended from Jews, he had to formally convert and attend courses on Judaism. He takes Hebrew classes at night and works as a janitor at a bank during the day. He tells me about his hope to find work as a mechanic and marry his girlfriend, who lives in Sderot.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">We watch five teenage Ethiopian hoodlums try to topple a street sign. They press against it, push and pull, hoping to pry it from the pavement. No one seems to care. As Ganatu shows me the neighborhood synagogue and bomb shelter, used for meetings of the religious Zionist movement Bnei Akiva, we notice a spotless BMW. It must belong to the upper- and middle-class neighbors that live just across the street. Indeed, Rehov Bilu, an affluent street named for the pioneers of the First Aliyah, is two blocks away. Now it is gated, ostensibly to prevent the Ethiopians from entering.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Ganatu and I enter the Har-El mall and are given a perfunctory search by yet another Ethiopian security guard. We eat at a kosher McDonald&rsquo;s; at the next table, an Arab family from Abu Gosh treats their children to Happy Meals. Flags of the world hang from the rafters&ndash;the United States displayed prominently among nations like Brazil, India, China, Thailand, even Egypt, but not Ethiopia. The food court includes &ldquo;Something Yemenite,&rdquo; Big Apple Pizza, a Chinese restaurant named Beijing, and a &quot;South African-style&quot; steak house, but Mevaseret Zion has no Ethiopian restaurant. &ldquo;Wouldn&rsquo;t it be nice to employ some of the older, illiterate women by doing what they do best&mdash;cook?&rdquo; Ganatu says. I agree.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">It is tempting to dwell on the contrast between the &ldquo;haves&rdquo; and &ldquo;have-nots&rdquo; of Mevaseret. The municipal fine for failing to clean up after one&rsquo;s dog is around 80 dollars&mdash;12.5 percent of an Ethiopian&rsquo;s yearly GDP per capita. At least Mevaseret has a merkaz klitah. Most Ethiopians have moved into gritty neighborhoods in urban centers like Jerusalem and Rehovot or into peripheral towns in the Galil or the Negev. There they struggle with poverty, along with other olim, or new immigrants, largely from Russia, and a few veteran Mizrahim. Many Ethiopians send their children to religious boarding schools to avoid falling prey to violence in these neighborhoods.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Every city or town with a sizable Ethiopian community boasts local businesses: restaurants, hairdressers, and merchants selling staples like tef and injara. Most visible are stores that sell Ethiopian and Pan-African ephemera: posters of Bob Marley, tzizit in the national colors (red, yellow, and green), and paintings of village life. Amharic and Tigrinya language CDs are common, but Idan Raichel, Shlomo Gronich or even Ayala Inguedasht, the first female Ethiopian-Israeli singer, cannot be found.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Ganatu and I part ways as I head to the Mizrahi part of town, Maoz Zion. On the way, I see a couple with their young daughter. The husband is obviously Ethiopian; the wife is Ashkenazi. This family is the ultimate example of successful absorption. I want to interview them but realize that they have the right to wait for a bus without being interrogated. Instead, I smile at their daughter, wondering how the Ethiopian community will fare in her lifetime.</p>
</span></p>