---
layout: default
title: Jew In or Jew Out?: Reviewing the Jewing in Contemporary Fiction
tags: [Arts]
created: 1255448215
changed: 1255448215
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">Literature has always served as a mirror for societal conditions of the time. Works by Jewish-American writers are no exception: novels by Abraham Cahan, Anzia Yezierska and Henry Roth at the turn of the 20th century naturally focused on the immigrant experience and adjustment to life in a new land; the next generation saw Philip Roth usher in the era of the upwardly mobile Jewish anti-hero. These were different times and different experiences, but the characters were always unmistakably Jewish. In our less affiliated times, with which elements of Jewish identification do Jewish writers imbue their fictional Jewish creations? The most prominent Jewish writers of today&mdash;Chabon, Safran Foer and Englander, among others&mdash;are throwbacks to the era of Roth, Malamud and Singer, focusing on Jewish worlds which no longer exist or sometimes never did. The Jewish writers who speak to the Jewish condition of our time are, perhaps fittingly, less well-known.</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">We asked a couple of&nbsp;<em>PresenTense</em>&nbsp;writers to review their favorite recent reads by Jewish authors, with an eye toward examining the Jewishness of their protagonists. If fiction is indeed a mirror of how we view ourselves or our places in society, then in Mischa Berlinski and Tasha Darsky, the main characters of the novels&nbsp;<em>Fieldwork&nbsp;</em>and<em>Overture</em>, respectively, we can be seen as Jews who acknowledge our Judaism tacitly, but who do not consider it an essential part of our identities. Read on:<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">by lilit marcus<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">At some point about halfway through Mischa Berlinski's debut novel,<em>Fieldwork</em>, I forgot that I was reading a novel at all. It's easy to blur the line between fiction and nonfiction when the author eponymously names his main character Mischa Berlinski, but unlike Jonathan Safran Foer, who used the same technique in Everything is Illuminated, Berlinski's writing is mesmerizing instead of pointedly ironic. Fieldwork is set in contemporary&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Thailand</st1:place></st1:country-region>, where Mischa and his girlfriend Rachel have ended up after college. While there, Mischa comes across the story of Martiya van der Leun, a Dutch-Indonesian anthropologist who died in a Thai women's prison.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Ultimately, Mischa is just a vessel for the real story, the fascinating and ultimately tragic life of Martiya. Berlinski made the right decision by focusing the bulk of his pages on Martiya's more interesting narrative. One notable exception is when Mischa meets with a missionary family with whom Martiya interacted during her life. The missionaries inquire about his religion and are pleased to learn that he is Jewish&mdash;after all, they consider the Jews &ldquo;God's chosen people.&rdquo; Although he does not join their mealtime prayers, they respect him in a way they never respected the godless Martiya. While Mischa identifies readily as Jewish, he fails to back up his religion with any personal connection. It seems that the missionaries know far more about his faith than he does. Nowhere else in the story does he pray, acknowledge Jewish holidays, or even pass up a pork dinner. Ultimately, this is the most striking of the characters'dichotomies: Mischa doesn't believe in much of anything, and Martiya believes far too much in everything.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">It is clear from Mischa's&mdash;and his author's&mdash;lack of interest in Judaism that he views Jewishness as his ethnicity and not his religion. However, mentioning Judaism and then letting it essentially disappear from the text does a great disservice to the book, as it could have been a perfect point of entry to Mischa's inner life. It is never revealed whether Mischa actually believes in Judaism or whether he identifies that way because he simply can't think of anything else to say. It would have been better to simply eliminate Judaism from the text entirely than to float the concept and then ignore it. While the book is well-constructed and an enjoyable read, it's hard to get past the fact that the audience seems to barely know the man entrusted to lead them through the narrative. He remains an enigma, and ultimately, we know no more about him at the end of the book than we do at the beginning. It is a disappointing aspect of an otherwise engrossing book.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">by lisa benjamin goodgame<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">For Tasha Darsky, the beautiful protagonist of Yael Goldstein's debut novel&nbsp;<em>Overture</em>, music is constantly a work in progress, even when it was written 300 years ago. Known as &ldquo;the femme fatale of the violin,&rdquo; Tasha becomes perhaps the best violinist since Paganini. But her professional success comes at the expense of personal struggles that eventually play themselves out on stage night after night&mdash;until a moment comes when it seems the sound and fury signify nothing.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">The daughter of prominent art dealers, Tasha grows up with a profound fear of failure, driven by an understanding that artistic creation is of the highest value. Ask Tasha Darsky what she wanted to be when she was seven, and she would have said &ldquo;one of God's&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on">Chosen</st1:place>&hellip;&rdquo; In her mixed-up world of art, music, and fantasy, she'd &ldquo;taken [her] parents' pagan beauty-worship and confused it just enough with the Jewish heritage that [her] grandparents [had tried] to sneak into&hellip;bedtime stories,&rdquo; so that &ldquo;God's Chosen&rdquo; was a strange pantheon that included the great painters her parents loved, the avant-garde musicians they enjoyed, and the writers they knew&mdash;all of whom possessed an achievable immortality. Apparently, it didn't matter if they were Jewish or not. As she imagines her complex definition of chosenness, Tasha asks herself, &ldquo;[H]ow and when will I know whether I matter in the world, I wonder. What can I do to ensure that I do? What will happen to me if I don't?&rdquo; Her struggle is to define an identity and to create a life that matters.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">In the end, Tasha's lament about chosenness is the singular element of Jewish thought in her life. Many other aspects of her life could have been shaped by her Jewish heritage&mdash;her immense fear of failure, her continued inability to please her father, and her desire to be &ldquo;more&rdquo; than her mother managed to be. Jews who read this novel will recognize a stereotypical family dynamic, but the characters are Jewish only in tangential ways. Tasha is a Jew whose religion is art, and whose Jewish identity is subordinated to everything else in her life. Her tenuous connections to her Jewish heritage come through her family and loved ones, and while left unsaid, it seems that she connects to her heritage through the history of Jewish violin virtuosos and the mournful, emotional evocation she draws out of the violin in her playing.</span></p>
</span></p>