---
layout: default
title: Judaism of the Brain: How College Life Has Changed Judaism
tags: [Features]
created: 1255440701
changed: 1255440701
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">One day in&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Hebrew</st1:placename>&nbsp;<st1:placetype w:st="on">School</st1:placetype></st1:place>, a bored classmate of mine wriggled out of the classroom window, started walking home, and didn't stop until he got there.</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; "><span style="color: black; ">This story is hardly shocking. While this was just one instance in a suburban&nbsp;<st1:state w:st="on">Connecticut</st1:state>&nbsp;</span><span style="color: black; ">after-school class, it's no secret that young<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Hebrew</st1:placename>&nbsp;<st1:placetype w:st="on">School</st1:placetype></st1:place>&nbsp;students across the country wish for a first-floor classroom to plot a similar escape. The deadly &ldquo;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Hebrew</st1:placename>&nbsp;<st1:placetype w:st="on">School&nbsp;illness&rdquo; hits every Tuesday and Thursday at 4 p.m., as students across the country take to their beds to wait out the period when they are expected to show up.<span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 16px; line-height: normal; ">&nbsp;</span></st1:placetype></st1:place></span></span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">While teachers and parents worry about the delinquency of the present generation, young Jews are running away from&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Hebrew</st1:placename>&nbsp;<st1:placetype w:st="on">School</st1:placetype></st1:place>&nbsp;because they haven't a clue why they were there in the first place. They may be under the impression that they are there in order to be able to recite a bunch of Hebrew prayers and then have a big birthday party at age 13. Some may even be nominally in favor this goal, secretly knowing that best use of their newfound Hebrew is actually as a cool way to pass notes in transliteration to fellow Jews in public schools.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">&ldquo;None of my peers were particularly interested in being there, and we spent no time at all, as far as I can recall, justifying our presence,&rdquo; says William Friedman, raised in the Conservative Movement. He does recall one incident, when &ldquo;in response to one student's goofing off during `<em>tefillah</em>&nbsp;time,' the teacher (a college-aged Orthodox woman) snapped that by goofing off, the student would be unable to say Kaddish [the prayer for the dead] for his father when the time came.&rdquo;<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">The truth is that most if not all of us were there because our parents put us there. As an institution,<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Hebrew</st1:placename>&nbsp;<st1:placetype w:st="on">School</st1:placetype></st1:place>&nbsp;fairly represents many of our parents' views on the optimal relationship between Judaism and other aspects of life. Whereas a solid, secular education provides the stepping-stone to succeeding socially and financially in mainstream American society, Hebrew School is relegated to the category of extracurricular activities&mdash;enriching and character-building, to be juggled somewhere between piano lessons and soccer. Of course, the issues motivating&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Hebrew</st1:placename>&nbsp;<st1:placetype w:st="on">School</st1:placetype></st1:place>&nbsp;attendance are far deeper than those propelling piano practice every afternoon. In a society that valued consensus and labels, our parents faced existential questions that<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Hebrew</st1:placename>&nbsp;<st1:placetype w:st="on">School</st1:placetype></st1:place>&nbsp;was supposed to address: how can one raise children to have a strong sense of being Jewish without them being &ldquo;too Jewish&rdquo;? At a time when the miracles of modernity included cars and egalitarianism, how can one preserve Jewish tradition in a meaningful way and still embrace progress?<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Our parents struggled with a quintessential theme in Jewish American history&mdash;embracing an American identity while maintaining a sense of Jewish self. Their solution involved compartmentalizing their Judaism so it would occupy specific times and places, including a few once-yearly holidays and family gatherings, and, of course, after-school&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Hebrew</st1:placename>&nbsp;<st1:placetype w:st="on">School</st1:placetype></st1:place>. The rest of the time&mdash;at school, in the workplace, and socializing with non-Jewish friends&mdash;they did their best to make sure faith wouldn't `get in the way.'<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">But fundamental assumptions have changed since the 1960s and 1970s. For instance, Jewish identity and American identity are no longer viewed as two opposing forces in need of reconciliation. As Bill Plevan, a young leader of the Conservative Movement and an ordained rabbi, points out, &ldquo;Negotiating being American and being Jewish is not as difficult anymore, because it's a very comfortable time to be Jewish in&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">America</st1:place></st1:country-region>.&rdquo; In addition, rather than adopting an identity solely out of membership in any one group, it is the fashion today for individuals to forge their own paths out of personal searches for authentic meaning. The combination of these two trends is resulting in the possibility of a third trend, small but strong, and often not taken into account in community surveys. Young people are exploring an internal and intellectual approach to a Judaism which is not just conventional tradition, but a holistic way of life: a Judaism of the brain.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">The emerging spiritual communities where these new trends are percolating and coalescing is the same place where societal trends have always percolated and coalesced: on college campuses.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">College is the socially accepted time for experimentation. When young adults leave home to live on their own for four years, their parents have the latent expectation that they will change somehow, hopefully grow up, and maybe even find themselves (or, failing that, at least find a spouse). Given a new, stimulating environment filled with opportunities for independence, young people reinvent themselves&mdash;several times over, if necessary.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">It used to be that Jews were merely tolerated on college campuses. Now, they are actively lured to themed Shabbat dinners and study-breaks, which have ushered in a new era of Jewish creativity and bad puns, as events such as &ldquo;Hookah in the Sukkah&rdquo; and &ldquo;Pizza in the Hut&rdquo; vie for young Jews' attendance. Our own peers solicit our membership in groups such as klezmer bands, Jewish a cappella,&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;clubs, Jews for Social Justice, Jewish women's groups&mdash;and the list goes on.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">In the aggregate, these events and groups provide much more than opportunity for Jewish socialization. They build a Jewish community&mdash;a very unique and new kind of&nbsp;</span><span style="color: black; ">adults are freely and seriously exploring forms of Jewish affiliation other than those espoused by their parents.<o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">Jewish community, composed of diverse young people who eat, live and learn together. This community is founded in an intellectual environment, where professors come to speak at Shabbat dinners, where conversations flow freely between secular and religious topics.</span></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; ">In this open environment of experimentation, young Jews are even given the ability to drift between different styles of services, which might have aroused consternation in other contexts.&nbsp;For many young adults coming from the&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Hebrew&nbsp;</st1:placename><st1:placetype w:st="on">School</st1:placetype></st1:place>&nbsp;mentality, college is the first time they come into contact with peers who practice a higher level of religious observance. They watch their peers celebrate Shabbat, they are turned down when attempting to shake hands with a member of the opposite sex, and they experience new holidays, whose existence previously was hazy, at best. Throughout all this, some feel they are recovering pieces of a puzzle possibly lost to that day when they pretended to be sick to get out of going to&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Hebrew</st1:placename><st1:placetype w:st="on">School</st1:placetype></st1:place>&nbsp;or climbed out the classroom window.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; background-image: none; background-repeat: repeat; background-attachment: scroll; -webkit-background-clip: initial; -webkit-background-origin: initial; background-color: white; background-position: 0% 50%; "><span style="color: black; ">As they learn about the why's and how's of religious observance, some find, much to their own surprise, that they actually prefer a holistic system of observance to the compartmentalization of religion with which they were raised. This is why it has become more broadly accepted&mdash;even, in some circles, hip&mdash;to be openly and conscientiously Jewish, because the decision to live an identity through all aspects of one's life comes across as respectable and authentic. Now that it has become less necessary to navigate the boundary between being an &ldquo;American Jew&rdquo; and a &ldquo;Jewish American,&rdquo; our generation feels free to navigate ways to our own amalgamation of Jewish life. Whether it is an observant Judaism, a bagels-and-lox-eating Judaism, an environmentally-friendly Judaism, or something new altogether, thoughtful young Jews are finding themselves on college campuses through creating their own identities which they find intellectually viable and personally satisfying. How they will teach these identities to their children remains to be seen.</span></p>
</span></p>