---
layout: default
title: Man with a Plan: Avi Liberman
tags: [Here and Now,israel,magazine,PT5]
created: 1257016526
changed: 1257016526
---
<p style="background: white none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="color: black;">Age: 36 <o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="background: white none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="color: black;">Home: Los Angeles, California <o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="background: white none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="color: black;">Profession: Stand-up comic <o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="background: white none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="color: black;">Watch him because: He's bringing laughter to those who need it most <o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="background: white none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="color: black;">How does a Jewish, half-Israeli comedian get to Afghanistan? Like the old joke goes, &ldquo;Practice, <o:p></o:p></span><span style="color: black;">practice, practice.&rdquo; <o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="background: white none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="color: black;">Born in Nahariya to American parents, Avi Liberman has been doing stand-up comedy in Los Angeles for more than a decade. He has regular spots at all the hottest clubs there, as well as in NYC and in Las Vegas, where he does special shows several times a year. But what distinguishes Liberman from the pack of embittered, possibly alcoholic misfits who manifest their discomfort through stand-up is his Jew-friendly routine. For example: &ldquo;I live in Los Angeles, which has enough of a Jewish community that we have a yeshiva day school basketball league&hellip;which I don't think is right because it instills kids with a false sense of athletic ability.&rdquo; <o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="background: white none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="color: black;">But beyond Chabad and Federation shows, Liberman has taken on an additional project that unites his Israeli identity with his commitment to comedy. Since 2003 he has created, planned, and managed a special initiative that brings American comedians to Israel to perform for English-speaking audiences&mdash;they perform at about five shows in different cities, and ticket sales support Jerusalem's non-profit Crossroads Center, the only intervention center for English-speaking teenagers. The funds raised from last summer's shows&mdash;which featured comedians Dwight Slade, Gary Gulman, and Craig Robinson and was hosted by Liberman&mdash;helped run the center for a full month. <o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="background: white none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="color: black;">&ldquo;The first two years, we did it to brighten people's spirits during the Second Intifada,&rdquo; Liberman recalls. During those early years, sometimes the trip just broke even, but as Liberman says, &ldquo;We never did it for the money in the first place.&rdquo; He tells of one of the very first shows he performed in Ra'anana, right in middle of the Second Intifada, when a girl approached him. &ldquo;`I haven't had anything to laugh about in over a year,' she said, very matter-of-factly. Then she just walked away. But then it occurred to me that maybe this is more important than I thought.&rdquo; <o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="background: white none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="color: black;">This year's tour, scheduled for mid-June, will take the comedians Dan Naturman, Lowell Sanders, and Harland Williams to Jerusalem, Raanana, Hashmonaim, Beit Shemesh, Tel Aviv, and Efrat. &ldquo;The most important thing for me is that the comics all leave as major fans of Israel,&rdquo; says Liberman, who incorporates touring into every Holy Land stay. &ldquo;It turns them into mini-Zionists.&rdquo; <o:p></o:p></span></p>
<p style="background: white none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="color: black;">But first, Liberman is doing a second tour of comedy duty for America's troops. Last November, it was Thanksgiving weekend in Afghanistan. This year, it's springtime in Iraq. The comedian's account of what happened in Afghanistan is predictably colorful and punchy&mdash;he talks about having been &ldquo;smuggled out of Afghanistan to Germany like a bag of heroin,&rdquo; and quips that he &ldquo;never thought he'd be so glad to be in Germany.&rdquo; But at his comedy's core is a deep sense of gratitude to the armed forces that Avi's glad to be repaying in laughter. <o:p></o:p></span></p>
<span style="color: black;">&ldquo;My dad served in the Israeli army, but I never did,&rdquo; Liberman explains. &ldquo;This was always a hole in my life, that I never served in either armed forces.&rdquo; When his comedy tour received a standing ovation of thanks, Liberman felt it was misdirected. &ldquo;I felt like I should be thanking them. I should be standing for them.&rdquo; </span>