---
layout: default
title: Mentor Talk
tags: [Features,boston,venture,fellowship,PT11]
created: 1278329630
changed: 1278497310
---
<p><strong>Mentors</strong>&nbsp;are a core island&nbsp;of stability in the fellows&rsquo;&nbsp;experience, meeting with&nbsp;fellows approximately once a&nbsp;month to serve as role models&nbsp;and provide practical advice&nbsp;and wisdom.</p>
<p><b>Ronit Ziv-Kreger</b> -&nbsp;Educator and Consultant&nbsp;</p>
<p><i>Tell us about your background</i>.&nbsp;My academic training is in management&nbsp;sciences from MIT&rsquo;s Sloan School where I&nbsp;focused on the connection between motivation&nbsp;and identity. While I enjoy the rigorous&nbsp;theoretical modeling, I also love to dance,&nbsp;hike, tell stories, and be creative. Working&nbsp;in education allows me to apply concepts in&nbsp;motivation and identity, be playful and creative&nbsp;with meaningful content, and build bridges&nbsp;between people and among disciplines. One&nbsp;of my favorite projects was working in Israel,&nbsp;serving as founding director of a program in 50&nbsp;middle schools and high schools that supports&nbsp;religious, secular, Arab, and Jewish students&nbsp;to create their own environmental solutions&nbsp;and present them at an annual professional&nbsp;conference of the Israel Ecological Society.&nbsp;In Israel, I also graduated from the Pardes&nbsp;Educators&rsquo; Program and have been serving as&nbsp;consultant and educator in the Boston area&nbsp;since&mdash;working in schools, synagogues, and&nbsp;teaching adults through Ikkarim, Me&rsquo;ah and&nbsp;at the Isabella Freedman retreat center.</p>
<p><i>What are you most passionate about? What&nbsp;do you really love doing?</i>&nbsp;I love weaving content from traditional Jewish&nbsp;texts into contemporary issues for different&nbsp;populations, including parents of young&nbsp;children, young adults, businesspeople, and&nbsp;families. I am passionate about creating a&nbsp;welcoming space for people with different&nbsp;Jewish backgrounds to learn together. I am&nbsp;also passionate about a variety of issues, such as&nbsp;food, leadership, parenting, and interpersonal&nbsp;communication.</p>
<p><i>What is the achievement you are most&nbsp;proud of?</i>&nbsp;I am proud of the transcendent moments that&nbsp;I help catalyze in my classes&mdash;when there is an&nbsp;insight, an &ldquo;aha&rdquo; moment, a new connection&nbsp;being made that deeply touches people. Such&nbsp;moments foster a deepening of appreciation for&nbsp;the wisdom of our tradition and its relevance&nbsp;to people&rsquo;s lives. What I share&mdash;and people&nbsp;often perceive&mdash;is my ability to connect with&nbsp;their wrestling with our tradition. I show them&nbsp;that they are not alone in that wrestling, and&nbsp;often that there are voices within the tradition&nbsp;that have been dealing with similar difficulties&nbsp;for centuries. I am proud of my successes in&nbsp;making connections for people through&nbsp;bringing the wisdom of the tradition to shed&nbsp;light on important issues they have in their&nbsp;own lives. Many are left surprised to find that&nbsp;ancient texts offer fresh insights.&nbsp;</p>
<p><i>What is the most important lesson you&rsquo;ve&nbsp;learned along the way that you would like to&nbsp;share with budding social entrepreneurs?</i>&nbsp;One of the biggest lessons I have learned is that&nbsp;we should aspire to do work that comes from the&nbsp;heart that is so connected to who one is that it&rsquo;s&nbsp;hard to distinguish between the dance and the&nbsp;dancer. With that, people sometimes get really&nbsp;excited about an idea, and start implementing&nbsp;it only based on what resonates for them and&nbsp;their immediate circle of acquaintances. But&nbsp;this can be a liability if entrepreneurs assume&nbsp;that others will think as they do and will have&nbsp;similar needs. Instead, social entrepreneurs&nbsp;today should work to understand different&nbsp;segments of the population, and then design&nbsp;a program or service which both comes from&nbsp;their heart and is based on our community&rsquo;s&nbsp;needs.</p>
<p><i>What is your vision or hope for the Boston&nbsp;Jewish community in the future?</i>&nbsp;My vision is that the different segments of&nbsp;the community&mdash;Orthodox, Reform, and so&nbsp;on&mdash;will understand that they have wonderful&nbsp;things to learn and teach one another. I wish&nbsp;the community to be a learning community&nbsp;that increasingly accesses the wisdom of the&nbsp;tradition, in diverse ways, with people gaining&nbsp;value that is relevant to their daily lives.&nbsp;I believe that we each have personal Torah&nbsp;wisdom to teach each other and that much of&nbsp;our work is dependent on our ability to grow an&nbsp;appreciation of klal Israel&mdash;the whole of Israel.&nbsp;</p>
<p><b>Scott Yaphe&nbsp;</b>-&nbsp;General Partner, ABS Ventures</p>
<p><i>Tell us about your background</i>.&nbsp;I grew up in Montreal and moved to the United&nbsp;States in the 1990s. It&rsquo;s not totally different, but&nbsp;there are cultural differences from the French-speaking&nbsp;city of Montreal with its European&nbsp;cultural focus. Having this international&nbsp;background has helped me think about things&nbsp;in a more global context. That was one of the&nbsp;things that drew me to PresenTense, with its&nbsp;global origins in Israel. Social needs extend&nbsp;beyond Israel&mdash;there are needs around the&nbsp;world, and social entrepreneurship extends&nbsp;beyond anyone&rsquo;s geographic borders.</p>
<p><i>What is unique about CJP/PresenTense</i>?&nbsp;It&rsquo;s impressive to see people who are doing things&nbsp;outside of the norm of business to build and grow&nbsp;new organizations. There are many resources&nbsp;available for people starting for-profit businesses&nbsp;in the mainstream, but that&rsquo;s not the case for&nbsp;entrepreneurs in the nonprofit world. I&rsquo;ve been&nbsp;involved in helping other social entrepreneurs&nbsp;before, but this is the first time I&rsquo;ve seen it in a&nbsp;Jewish context.</p>
<p><i>What are you most passionate about</i>?&nbsp;Most of my career has been spent making&nbsp;investments in small, rapidly growing&nbsp;companies, helping entrepreneurs who have a&nbsp;vision to achieve success. It&rsquo;s fun to help a group&nbsp;of impressive people with limited resources to&nbsp;build a business that is profitable. From this, it&nbsp;was a short leap to move to working with CJP/PresenTense to build organizations of value.</p>
<p><i>What is the most important lesson&nbsp;you&rsquo;ve learned along the way that&nbsp;you would like to share with budding&nbsp;social entrepreneurs</i>?&nbsp;It never ceases to amaze me that things rarely&nbsp;go as you expect with new ventures. You start&nbsp;off going in one direction, but there are always&nbsp;twists and turns along the way. This can be&nbsp;scary, especially when something unexpected&nbsp;smacks you in the face. But there is an old&nbsp;adage that&rsquo;s helpful to remember: if you&rsquo;re on a&nbsp;path with no obstacles, it probably doesn&rsquo;t lead&nbsp;anywhere. Overcoming unexpected obstacles&nbsp;often opens up more opportunities and can&nbsp;lead to something better than you originally&nbsp;planned: a better business, a better job, etc. &nbsp;This is true in life as much as it is in business.&nbsp;I try and always ask questions about how we&nbsp;think a new venture will proceed, and then&nbsp;look at the possible obstacles so that we can&nbsp;try to foresee as much as possible. Obviously,&nbsp;you can&rsquo;t foresee everything. However, taking&nbsp;this approach takes away the emotional part of&nbsp;dealing with changes. You don&rsquo;t get as upset&nbsp;by them.</p>
<p><i>What advice would you give to your&nbsp;younger self</i>?&nbsp;Life is random, no matter how much you try&nbsp;to plan. Whatever business plan you write, the&nbsp;venture will likely end up looking different.&nbsp;This isn&rsquo;t a problem and it certainly isn&rsquo;t a&nbsp;weakness. Is that advice I wish I&rsquo;d given to&nbsp;myself 10 or 20 years ago? Absolutely. The&nbsp;key is not to look backwards but to move on.&nbsp;</p>
<p><i>What is your vision or hope for&nbsp;Boston and its community of social&nbsp;entrepreneurs in the future</i>?&nbsp;Boston is in a unique position because it&rsquo;s filled&nbsp;with smart people, numerous universities,&nbsp;and an active investment community full&nbsp;of businesspeople who are used to investing&nbsp;in risky endeavors. So the DNA is in place&nbsp;to support social entrepreneurs. To me,&nbsp;the social entrepreneur moniker is a bit of&nbsp;a misnomer because it implies that social&nbsp;entrepreneurs are different from other types&nbsp;of entrepreneurs. That&rsquo;s not really true. While&nbsp;social entrepreneurs don&rsquo;t have the goal of&nbsp;making a profit, they face the same challenges&nbsp;in growing their organizations as entrepreneurs&nbsp;who are running for-profit ventures. In Boston,&nbsp;there is a ready community of investors, and&nbsp;there is no reason why Boston shouldn&rsquo;t be a&nbsp;global center for these types of ventures. The&nbsp;CJP/PresenTense program is a great example&nbsp;of what can be achieved.&nbsp;PT</p>
<p><i>Andrew Becker, member of the Boston Fellowship Steering Committee, has&nbsp;been volunteering within the Boston&nbsp;Jewish community for 10 years.</i></p>
<p><i>Jamie David was a fellow at PTI &lsquo;08 in&nbsp;Jerusalem and started the nonprofit&nbsp;Shomer Achi. She serves on the&nbsp;Boston Fellowship Steering Committee.</i></p>