---
layout: default
title: More than a Pretty Face: Israel's PR Makeover
tags: [Society,magazine,PT5]
created: 1257270397
changed: 1257270397
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Cerulean seas, an iridescent sunset over yellow and pink sand, epicurean delights, attractive natives&mdash;who wouldn&rsquo;t want to vacation in such a destination? There are &ldquo;passionate people&rdquo; and &ldquo;magical markets,&rdquo; a country replete with a &ldquo;sense of history,&rdquo; and the &ldquo;mystery of nature.&rdquo; There is beauty, sophistication, and friendliness. You might not have known it, but this is&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In an effort to increase international traffic, the North American office of Israel&rsquo;s Ministry of Tourism launched an $11 million marketing campaign based on the slogan &ldquo;Israel: Who Knew?&rdquo; It presents&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>as the perfect place for the &ldquo;sophisticated traveler&rdquo;&mdash;a necessary feat for a country dependent on tourists for crucial state revenue.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">As&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on">Israel</st1:country-region>&nbsp;approaches its 60th birthday, the current ad campaign reveals how&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&rsquo;s marketing team views the country. According to<st1:city w:st="on">Arie Sommer</st1:city>,&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on">Israel</st1:country-region>&rsquo;s Tourism Commissioner for North and South America, the average traveler may have heard of the Galilee or the Dead Sea, but they are not always associating those places with<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>. Rather, he said, people think of&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;as a holy site or a place to visit family, but not as a place where a vacationer would travel for a cultural experience or a scenic escape. Sommer acknowledges that the political climate of&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;affects tourist traffic, and that a decrease in terrorism contributes to recent increases in tourism.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Originally conceived in 2005 as the Second Intifada was winding down, the new campaign seeks to convey a different kind of&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>. Unlike the Foreign Ministry, whose goal is to cast&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;in a new light (the infamous Maxim spread of bikini-clad Israelis is just one example), the Ministry of Tourism seeks to attract visitors because visitors spend money. In 2000,&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on">Israel</st1:country-region>&nbsp;hosted a record 2.5 million tourists, but the Second Intifada and war in&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Lebanon</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;kept them at bay for several years. In 2007, tourism to&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on">Israel</st1:country-region>&nbsp;reached the highest level since before the Second Intifada at 2.3 million, a quarter of which was from the&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">United States</st1:place></st1:country-region>. A 10-15% growth in tourism is projected for 2008, the year&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;celebrates its 60th anniversary, according to the Tourism Ministry.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The &ldquo;Who Knew?&rdquo; ad campaign is featured on billboards, the Internet, major magazines and newspapers, and is broadcast on TV in the&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">United States</st1:place></st1:country-region>. The commercials display nightlife, shopping, historic sites, contemporary architecture, and food and wine, culminating in the punch line. The print and Internet components of the campaign, which were launched after the war in 2007, contain a second message as well: &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll love&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;from the first Shalom.&rdquo; These ads also feature regular Israelis, such as a chef, a sailor, and a cowboy. &ldquo;The campaign&rsquo;s thrust is to depict ordinary Israelis with interesting hobbies/careers, in beautiful places,&rdquo; says Sommer. The ad suggests that, despite what potential tourists may see in the news, Israeli is just a normal place filled with normal folk.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Other countries once known for war now overflow with vacationers. Though&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on">Croatia</st1:country-region>&rsquo;s leaders are now on trial for war crimes committed in the 1990&rsquo;s, its sparkling&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placetype w:st="on">port</st1:placetype>&nbsp;of&nbsp;<st1:placename w:st="on">Dubrovnik</st1:placename></st1:place>&mdash;once under siege&mdash;is a ritzy cruise stop that welcomes thousands of tourists per day during the summer season.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The current tagline, aimed at the average American traveler, is not the first campaign to resort to the superficial perks of the land&mdash;see the &ldquo;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>. Whatever: It&rsquo;s All Beautiful&rdquo; campaign circa 2000.&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on">Israel</st1:country-region>&rsquo;s recent history of campaigning for tourism may ignore some important aspects of&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&rsquo;s substance. Yes,&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on"><st1:place w:st="on">Israel</st1:place></st1:country-region>&nbsp;is home to camels, colorful rock formations, and beaches, but it is also a land of great historical and religious importance as well as scientific innovation and modern architectural achievements.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">Beyond pure economic motives, it&rsquo;s worth asking whether&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on">Israel</st1:country-region>&nbsp;has an interest in&mdash;or even a responsibility to&mdash;urge and entice Jews to come to the&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on">Holy Land</st1:place>. After all,&nbsp;<st1:country-region w:st="on">Israel</st1:country-region>&nbsp;isn&rsquo;t the Virgin Islands or the&nbsp;<st1:place w:st="on"><st1:placename w:st="on">Amalfi</st1:placename><st1:placetype w:st="on">Coast</st1:placetype></st1:place>. Who knew?</span>&nbsp;</p>