---
layout: default
title: Not Bringing Home the Bacon
tags: [Society]
created: 1250887207
changed: 1250887207
---
<p>Earlier this spring, I did a bad, bad, bad thing: I let a container of my grandma&rsquo;s matzah ball soup spoil.</p>
<p>Let me back up: following our family&rsquo;s second Seder, my grandma sent me back to Boston with a goodie bag of frozen homemade pesadich delicacies. The chocolate-dipped matzah and the cookies, I ate. The mushroom kugel, I traded to my brother for pogs. And the soup, I put in the fridge to defrost.</p>
<p>I didn&rsquo;t forget about it, per se; rather, I looked at it once in awhile and each time, seeing its gloriously cloudy, matzah ball soup-y appearance, illogically concluded that it must still be thawing. Mid-May, I decided it was time for a taste, and I discovered that my thawing theory was way, way off-base. We&rsquo;ll leave it at that.</p>
<p>Now, my grandma&rsquo;s matzah ball soup is no ordinary thing; indeed, I hear it was something of a marriage incentive for both of my cousins&rsquo; husbands. The point is, I felt truly horrible.</p>
<p>Yes, Jews are credited with having invented virtual reality, local anesthesia and crippling guilt; yes, my grandmother&rsquo;s matzah ball soup is like scrumptious ships of unleavened rapture floating on a sea of liquid gold, more precious than the rarest jewels. Still, I hardly experienced the same soul-destroying shame about &ldquo;forgetting&rdquo; to return my mother&rsquo;s padparadscha sapphire earrings after Cousin Rebecca&rsquo;s bat mitzvah.</p>
<p>All this is to say, yes, as with guilt, Jews have a Thing with food. And yes, there&rsquo;s the obvious intersection of the Food Thing and the Guilt Thing&mdash;oh, and also the Eons of Persecution Thing&mdash;that inspires in most contemporary Jews an incapacitating aversion to letting food go to waste. Nevertheless, I contend that this particular scenario runs deeper than that: I felt far worse than I would have about, say, a pound of Nova, and I attribute the discrepancy to the religious significance of matzah ball soup.</p>
<p>By letting that golden culinary masterpiece turn to rancid yellow muck, I let down not only my grandma but also each of the ancestors who defied Pharaoh, crossed the Red Sea and made it into the Land of Milk and Honey. They rejoiced in the manna, and ate it up fresh from heaven; they didn&rsquo;t leave it to spoil in a Tupperware knock-off beside their exboyfriend&rsquo;s vermouth.</p>
<p>Nearly every one of our holidays is bound up in what must be eaten when, or in the abstention from food, or both; indeed, for many, a given holiday&rsquo;s ritual has been reduced to that which pertains to food and nothing else. For example, I have continued into my adulthood to refer to any consumption of apples-with-honey on days other than the first or second of Tishrei as &ldquo;playing Rosh Hashanah.&rdquo; For another example, imagine the following scene unfolding between my freshman year roommate and me.</p>
<p>Her: &ldquo;Have you eaten breakfast? I brought you some fruit from the dining hall.&rdquo; Me (witheringly): &ldquo;Um, HELLO?? I can&rsquo;t&mdash;it&rsquo;s Yom Kippur.&rdquo; (She looks mortified for her cultural insensitivity; I look utterly unrepentant for my transgression.) &ldquo;Say, I&rsquo;m going to be late for class&mdash;can you help me on with my new boots? They&rsquo;re a little snug, but calfskin usually stretches a bit.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Okay, so that never actually happened, but the point is still upheld: even trundling off in my leather shoes to think about microeconomics, I felt I was keeping Yom Kippur because of, you know, the Food Thing.</p>
<p>There&rsquo;s even picking and choosing&mdash;and the corollary pious relativism&mdash;within the comestible sphere: every Passover, I&rsquo;ll have at least one interaction in which I snub a lessobservant-than-I friend when she consumes something or other, perhaps that titan of treif finger foods, the pig in a blanket.</p>
<p>&ldquo;Oh&hellip;you&rsquo;re not keeping <em>Pesach?</em>&rdquo; I&rsquo;ll inquire loftily, emphasizing the Hebrew and making noises to suggest I&rsquo;d be more forgiving if I weren&rsquo;t busy channeling the hardship of 40 years spent wandering the desert. Then I&rsquo;ll pick apart eight or nine of the blankets and pop the naked pigs, one by one, into my mouth. And as I turn away, still chewing, a disapproving look from a more-observant-than-I friend will make me want to run back through time and past the fresh manna to let the Red Sea swallow up me and my shame.</p>
<p>This shaming hierarchy is all too easy: to Jews, food is not just a marker of holiday&mdash;it&rsquo;s also a point of honor, a yardstick of religiosity along which we can place ourselves and others, a gauge for just how Chosen we are choosing to be. Consider the spectrum of the kosher lifestyle: at one end lie those for whom keeping kosher means picking off the pepperoni; at the other end, we find the set who scrutinize every label, rejecting all but the most renowned <em>hechshers</em> as practically tantamount to bacon-wrapped.</p>
<p>Very recently, I myself have come to &ldquo;keep kosher,&rdquo; though only by default, because (as befits what is most accurately described as my dietary restriction of the week) I&rsquo;m presently a vegan. But I&rsquo;m not always a vegan (just as I&rsquo;m not always allergic to peanuts, or always consecotaleophobic), and although I&rsquo;m therefore not always kosher, you can bet your blintzes that my JDate profile presently says &ldquo;I keep Kosher: At home and outside.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Sorry, all you guys who &ldquo;Go to synagogue: On High Holidays&rdquo;&mdash;you&rsquo;ll have to marry some other, less observant woman&rsquo;s grandma&rsquo;s soup.</p>
<p><em>Rachel Lieff Axelbank is a freelance writer, public health researcher and culinary antagonist. She lives and works in Boston.</em></p>