---
layout: default
title: Personal Giving Through Global Service
tags: [Around the World,volunteering,cultural diversity,magazine]
created: 1258927195
changed: 1260374676
---
<p>As part of PresenTense&rsquo;s theme of philanthropy and global service, I interviewed my friend Andrew Carmona, who will be leaving in October as part of a 10-month World Partners Fellowship in India with the American Jewish World Service (AJWS). Currently, Andrew works for a small international development firm in Washington, D.C.</p>
<p><strong>Q: What is AJWS and what will you be doing for your fellowship?</strong></p>
<p><strong>A:</strong> AJWS is a Jewish international development organization. They work with nongovernmental organizations on the ground in various developing countries to help build local communities&rsquo; capacities to improve their own lives. The World Partners Fellowship that I am doing is like a Jewish Peace Corps, if such a thing existed.</p>
<p>As a World Partners Fellow, I will receive a stipend to live in western India for 10 months to do development work. I could be in a city as large as Mumbai or in a small rural village. The work that fellows will do varies from health and HIV/AIDS to promoting sustainable livelihoods--working with artisans and their crafts, microfinance, housing and land rights [including environmental resource conservation], or IT.</p>
<p><strong>Q: What are you looking forward to about the experience?</strong></p>
<p><strong>A:</strong> I&rsquo;m excited about working in development, and learning more about actually implementing work on the ground. I&rsquo;m also excited about the opportunity for personal growth--the culture shock, the spirituality, learning from new people and places. &ldquo;The experience will be totally different from anything I&rsquo;ve ever had.&rdquo;&nbsp;</p>
<p><strong>Q: How did you learn about the fellowship?</strong></p>
<p><strong>A:</strong> When I was in college I went on two Alternative Spring Break trips through AJWS--the first in El Salvador and the second in Guatemala. Since those trips, I&rsquo;ve kept in close contact with the organization.</p>
<p><strong>Q: What were those trips like?</strong></p>
<p><strong>A:</strong> In El Salvador, we were working in a small rural village, helping farmers to diversify their crops in a region that had been devastated by 14 years of civil war. Then, in addition to the assistance work, AJWS had a great educational component to their programs. We went out into the fields and then came back and studied agricultural sustainability, human rights, and resource conservation. &nbsp;It was a crash course in development&hellip;It&rsquo;s when I really discovered that I wanted to do development work.</p>
<p>We also talked about what we had been doing in the context of Judaism and social justice, studying tikkun olam and gemilut chasadim. Two Jewish concepts stuck with me from those study sessions: When you save a life, you are responsible for that life. And it is better to give charity anonymously.</p>
<p><strong>Q: How do you reconcile the idea of giving anonymously with the global service you are doing in person?</strong></p>
<p><strong>A:</strong> We actually grappled with that question on the second alternative break trip in Guatemala. There, we helped a local community build a gate around a school and build a bridge over a low area that would flood and keep children from being able to get to school. We had conversations about the fact that people from the local population could get the bridge built 10 times faster and better--they speak the language, they know the people, they are familiar with the terrain. Why were we, a group of foreign kids, there? Why couldn&rsquo;t we just give money to a local organization or community to build the bridge themselves?</p>
<p>We came to the conclusion that the service component is essential. That it is important for young people to go down to Guatemala, to meet the people, and to learn about the issues that affect them. Then we can go back and do something with it. Everyone was affected by the trip. Everyone did something with the trip, like me.</p>
<p><strong>Q: What did you do with what you learned from the trips?&nbsp;</strong></p>
<p><strong>A:</strong> I came to D.C. and worked for a small company that implements health care and microfinance programs. A couple of months ago, my company sent me to Ethiopia for 25 days to help put together a one-day trade fair for the private health care sector. The purpose was to bring vendors and private health care providers together from all over the country in order to strengthen the private sector--which on the whole tends to provide better health care services than the public sector but is historically under-funded.</p>
<p>It&rsquo;s probably not an original answer, but doing a typical job, say, at a law firm in D.C., who are you advancing? In who&rsquo;s interest? Doing what we do, there&rsquo;s actual satisfaction from it. Helping people who are less fortunate than myself&hellip; it&rsquo;s fulfilling, really fulfilling.</p>
<p><strong>Q: How does being Jewish connect to the development work you do?</strong></p>
<p><strong>A:</strong> The majority of people I work with in these countries have never met a Jewish person before. They have preconceptions and stereotypes--usually negative. When they ask me what religion I am, I hesitate sometimes, because I&rsquo;m not sure what their response will be. When I was in Ethiopia, the people were so nice, I never received a negative reaction. There are Jews in the north of the country, and many Ethiopian Jews--members of the lost tribe. But when I lived in Spain during college, my friend had a bad reaction when telling people he was Jewish. He received a passionately negative response regarding Israel.</p>
<p>That is why it is important to do good work. It is really important to be an ambassador; not just for America or the West, but for Jews. I&rsquo;ve always had a connection to being Jewish. I love the Jewish tradition of studying and gemilut chasadim. It fits perfectly into international development. AJWS and being Jewish have given me a medium to do the things I like.</p>