---
layout: default
title: Pitch an Idea: Centers for Applied Jewish Studies
tags: [Ideas and Innovation,Education,community,leadership,universities]
created: 1243987092
changed: 1243989460
---
<p>We are at a fork in the road of Jewish history. The institutions that dominated 20th-century Jewish life are in decline. We need compelling new models for organizing Jews for the 21st century. To discover and deliver these innovations, we must find and educate a generation of pathfinders who understand and value where we come from while maintaining focus on where we are going.</p><p>We can find and develop these pathfinders on university campuses across the country by establishing Centers for Applied Jewish Studies. “Applied Jewish Studies” is about designing new approaches to Jewish life by applying core principles and knowledge in new ways. A Center for Applied Jewish Studies would be a laboratory for Jewish innovations that combines a think tank and education center with a living Jewish community.</p><p></p><p>A Center would have a permanent “faculty” of five to 10 dynamic and thoughtful Jewish leaders. They would spend half of their time as thinker-practitioners in the Jewish world and the other half working with students to build a model Jewish community and train future innovators.</p><p>“Senior fellow” positions would be occupied for two to three years by outstanding Jewish leaders who want to spend time reflecting on their practice and sharing their knowledge and experience with the next generation. These fellows would also be energized by the Center’s intensive environment, and they would carry the spirit of innovation back with them when they returned to full-time practice.</p><p>A university campus is the perfect place to situate such a Center. Policy think tanks are located in Washington, because it is Washington they are trying to influence. As the Jewish community’s most pressing need is to influence Jewish young adults, the natural laboratory of a Center for Applied Jewish Studies is the university. Most American Jews attend college, and college students are especially open to exploring new options.</p><p>On a university campus, new approaches to Jewish living, inspiration, and education can be designed, piloted, assessed, and refined, creating a rapid innovation cycle. New leaders can be trained with habits of reflection, innovation, and a commitment to excellence. Think of John Dewey’s lab school or a teaching hospital as models of such an approach.</p><p>The Center’s faculty and fellows could also enlist university faculty in various projects. Imagine a working group examining new forms of experiential Jewish education for college students that included developmental psychologists, professors of education, sociologists, philosophers, anthropologists, and humanities scholars. Continual feedback would come from assessing new initiatives piloted on campus based on the group’s work.</p><p>We can start with just one Center. Some of the young adults it inspires and trains may want to emulate their teachers and become professional Jewish leaders. A few will go on to establish another Center, and another, and another. Fifty years ago, there were only a few Jewish Studies professors at American universities, but they trained the next generation, and now hundreds of professors teach Jewish Studies, with new chairs, departments, and centers established all the time.</p><p>The same pattern can take hold for Applied Jewish Studies, and it can be accelerated because alumni whose life courses have been changed will support the creation of Centers in their communities. Furthermore, as the broader Jewish community comes to see the impact of such Centers, it will invest in them at a much higher level than the community’s current investment in university students.</p><p>The first Center and its progeny can become the idea engines of the Jewish people and continual sources of energized and highly trained Jewish pathfinders, who will set the course of the Jewish future and deliver the change we need.</p>