---
layout: default
title: Prosumers in the Jewish Future
tags: [Ideas and Innovation]
created: 1317758066
changed: 1317820762
---
<p>
	<em>Jewish Futures Conferences are designed to provide a forum to address the Jewish educational community&rsquo;s challenge of remaining relevant to 21st century learners and their families. Bringing to the forefront many of the leading voices in education and technology of our community, the Jewish Futures Conferences raise awareness about the current landscape among 21st century educators and leaders and challenge all to bring new possibilities for Jewish education that can engage and inspire.</em></p>
<p>
	<em>As part of these conferences, the Jewish Futures competitions also encourage emerging voices to contribute their thoughts and ideas on the future of Jewish education, with winners presenting their work at a Jewish Futures Conference.</em></p>
<p>
	<em>This year&rsquo;s theme is: &ldquo;How will Jewish life, living, and learning change as we move to a society in which individuals are not only consumers of information and culture, but also producers of their own and others&rsquo; experiences?&rdquo;</em></p>
<p>
	<em>We issued a challenge to the Jewish Futures Facebook group: to collectively create an article which addressed the connections and complexities between &ldquo;prosumerism&rdquo; and leadership. The article&rsquo;s creation modeled the concept: each contributor produced his or her own content, and simultaneously consumed that of others. Many members, from students to seasoned professionals, artists to technical gurus, and everything in between, responded passionately and articulately, bringing in their varied experiences and presenting diverse views on the ultimate question, &ldquo;In a world of producer/consumers, what does &lsquo;leadership&rsquo; mean?&rdquo;</em></p>
<p>
	<em>Jewish Futures is a partnership between The Jewish Education Project and JESNA&rsquo;S Lippman Kanfer Institute in conjunction with The Jewish Federations of North America and UJA Federation of New York. The Conference is held this year on November 7th in Denver, Colorado, at the General Assembly of Jewish Federations of North America.</em></p>
<p>
	<strong style="border-style: initial; border-color: initial; font-size: 13px; ">How will Jewish life, living, and learning change as we move to a society in which individuals are not only consumers of information and culture, but also producers or their own and others&#39; experiences?</strong></p>
<p>
	<strong>David Y. Chack</strong>: By linking prosumerism and leadership to a vision of Jewish education, an image is created in our minds, perhaps conjuring an engaged group of people who are actively involved in Jewish learning. We imagine them as though they are making their own choices coming from a desire for knowledge and to be involved. We picture them strongly connected to their communities in leadership roles or as up-and-coming leaders who will move the community forward into the future utilizing the best in Jewish wisdom.</p>
<p>
	This image is not new even if the word &ldquo;prosumerism&rdquo; is. Jewish communities have maintained the positive metaphor of engaged learning through the image of the yeshiva since the middle ages invoking the days of Babylonia as its inception. And through this image they have worked to engage leaders as educators and educators as leaders.</p>
<p>
	But the image is in crisis. The multi- and inter-cultural world is breaking old assumptions. New technologies are driving the discussion. The Internet has made the world of knowledge more open-sourced than ever. Libraries, texts, encyclopedias, literature are at our fingertips. Institutions are no longer needed to teach and the role of the educator is changing rapidly so that that the educator may become obsolete.</p>
<p>
	So what is the current image of Jewish life and learning to be? Is it still the yeshiva? Or is it a flattened sense of self and community? Does it allow for true democratization or does it still try to train Jewish thinking and community to have the outcomes that are expected and wanted? Also how does the virtual world that is being created transform not only the tools for learning but also the content itself? Will the Jewish community value points of view that include gay culture, gendering, Christianity, Islam, conservative politics, progressive opinions and more? How do the arts play a role in new forms of creativity and leadership that lead to a new and open image of community with art, culture, and expressiveness?</p>
<p>
	<strong>Rabbi Owen Gottlieb</strong>: In the discipline of Digital Media and Learning, we use the term &quot;producer&quot; to describe today&#39;s learners and their cultural engagement in the production of culture and media, rather than a more passive consumption of media (historically, &ldquo;prosumer&rdquo; has been used for consumer electronics that are not quite professional grade &ndash; &ldquo;professional/consumer grade&rdquo;).</p>
<p>
	In his groundbreaking _Convergence Culture_, Henry Jenkins (2006) notes the return to folk culture afforded by the Internet, as cultural consumers turn to machinima, fan fiction, self produced videos, and other forms of cultural production. A phenomenon long part of fan communities has gone massively mainstream in recent years. A many-to-many cultural production and consumption is now running along with the one-to-many broadcast model. In Jewish educational leadership, this means that we must concentrate on project based, &quot;artifact&quot; producing, collaborative, self-directed, creative, design oriented, problem solving-oriented education. &ldquo;Artifacts&rdquo; are what learners produce - whether writing, video, models, this article, etc. At ConverJent (<a href="http://www.facebook.com/groups/jewishfutures/doc/265267696823992/www.converJent.org">www.converJent.org</a>) I concentrate on Games for Jewish Learning, as Game design for learning fosters all of these 21st Century learning skills. We teach and learn Torah through Game-based models, primarily Game Design for Learning - learners are empowered as designers as they prototype a variety of Games. In so doing, they learn the material enough to teach and engage others. Leadership in this model means facilitating and guiding self-directed learners in project based, problem-solving-based learning. ConverJent is incubated in NYC at Clal and ignited by a PresenTense NYC Fellowship.</p>
<p>
	<strong>Alan Jay Sufrin</strong>: As Tom Friedman says, &quot;Whatever can be done, will be done. There&#39;s only one question for you: will it be done by you or to you?&quot; (<a href="about:blank">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oM2BguxRSyY</a>) I&#39;d like to offer this as a definition for &quot;prosumer.&quot; One who chooses to become a leader in any field must make use of all the appropriate tools available. This has always been true. But in the flat world in which we live, it&#39;s exaggerated a hundredfold because all the appropriate tools are simply a wifi connection - or a GPS signal, or a cellular connection - away. Leadership is now an integral part of what we&#39;re calling &#39;prosumerism,&#39; and &#39;prosumerism&#39; is an integral part of leadership. As for Jewish &quot;prosumership,&quot; adding strong, positive Jewish voices to the world-flattening process is a necessary part of maintaining and fortifying Jewish identity. I would even go so far as to say that it&#39;s a necessary part of fortifying the global identity of humankind in the flat world.</p>
<p>
	<strong>Marc Stober</strong>: The most engaging experiences I&#39;ve had have been as a prosumer (though I never called it that). What I worry about is over-professionalization, where an institution decides it&#39;s going to run things &quot;like a business&quot; by the professionals. As an alternative, paid staff of Jewish institutions could see it as their primary role to co-produce with members of the community, resulting in programs both professional in quality and engaging as grassroots efforts.</p>
<p>
	<strong>Lisa Colton</strong>: I think &quot;prosumerism&quot; is a return to a traditional Judaism that is a real sign of promise for our community. No longer are we content to outsource &quot;doing Jewish&quot; to professionals, were we can attend an event and say, &quot;I did X observance&quot;. Rather, by being empowered (socially, technologically, and Jewishly) to produce as well as consume, we can synthesize our knowledge, integrate the various attributes of our identities (Jewish and otherwise), and take ownership of (i.e. LEAD) our own Jewish lives.</p>
<p>
	<strong>Naomi Less</strong>: The folks I&#39;ve been around and had the privilege of working with who are prosumers don&#39;t necessarily care or wait for critical mass to congregate around an idea - they just put it out there. I wonder if that is different from our notions of being a leader - getting consensus, etc.</p>
<p>
	<strong>Todd Jelken</strong>: Some individuals, such as myself, are not comfortable with the role of being a leader and don&#39;t like the responsibility that comes with it. Being a &quot;prosumer&quot; gives the opportunity to be an active contributor and help/guide people in any number of ways, while not being directly in charge. These people also get their ideas out there first, rather than necessarily waiting for a group&#39;s approval and support. And once their content is out there, it becomes available for the rest of the Jewish world to use, adapt, and mold into their own unique creative ends.</p>
<p>
	<strong>Elizabeth Yaari</strong>: When a person has been given the opportunity to contribute their creativity - the essence of who they are (from Latin esse: to be) - they become a natural inspiration to others. They know what to do and have the medium to express it. Some may be just leaders for the day, but that&#39;s OK. If they continue on, they become masters in their field. I think masters are the ultimate leaders and teachers. They have mastered being their essential selves.</p>
<p>
	<strong>Daniel Brenner</strong>: Much of this conversation reflects an insight that Mordecai Kaplan had in the early 1930s -- that there was a shift occurring between the producers (rabbinic authorities) and the consumers (amcha). The consumers were producing their own forms (Jewish folkways), challenging the traditional patterns. The &quot;flattening&quot; in his time was democracy itself -- the ability for Jews to vote and be part of a process of governance was a new thing (especially for women). The American idea that one can lead regardless of pedigree was a strong influence on Jewish circles. This led to all sorts of new people looking to establish themselves as leaders and a virtual toppling of the old guard. My sense about now-- leadership just ain&#39;t what it used to be, because loyalty isn&#39;t what it used to be. So we look towards various &quot;leader-less&quot; ideas--like prosuming--because we do not trust a producer. :)</p>
