---
layout: default
title: Reinventing the Synagogue
tags: [Society,religion,magazine,ideas,PT10]
created: 1268557720
changed: 1272962497
---
<p>Over the past five and a half years, I have been training to be the best rabbi I can be, and now that I&rsquo;m ready to be unleashed on the world... there aren&rsquo;t many synagogue jobs available. We&rsquo;re told to be creative in our search for jobs outside of the synagogue instead.</p>
<p>Synagogues are facing tough times. According to Dr. Steven Windmueller at Hebrew Union College, about three-fourths of them are out of money. Families are not renewing memberships, and budgets are being slashed. The economic downturn has forced synagogues to face difficult choices, some of which call their very core values into question. Jews are classified based on their synagogue affiliation, and are considered marginal if not affiliated. But of the roughly 5.5 million Jews in the United States, only about one million are affiliated with a synagogue, and a much smaller percentage actually attend services on any Shabbat. Are synagogues serving the Jewish people then, or only a small but active subset of Jews?</p>
<p>Synagogues have been the de-facto centers of Jewish life, and they attempt to meet the core needs of the Jewish people: community, study, prayer, and action. However, the primary perceived purpose of the synagogue, as seen through the eyes of the Jewish community, is prayer. If prayer is not the top Jewish priority for some, or they pray differently than the standard synagogue service, they may never set foot inside the door, and therefore will never have access to the study, community, or service opportunities available within.</p>
<p>This suggests that we may need a new model in which the synagogue is but one legitimate avenue in a vast network of connections. We can look to Jewish history for models of change. Take the tragic story of the destruction of the Second Temple. Some Jews still mourn this loss each year on Tisha B&rsquo;Av. Countless lives were extinguished, and Jewish life as it was known crumbled. But Judaism lived on. From the one Temple came many synagogues. As the Jews were dispersed around the globe, synagogues helped maintain Jewish life. And the connections between these synagogues, through letters and travelers, maintained a vital support network. But it wasn&rsquo;t a clean break from the past. Pieces of the old were brought into the new, though changed as a result. The practice of sacrifices, essential in the Temple service, was transformed into rituals like the Shabbat dinner table. The seeds of the future, the synagogues, existed at the end of the Second Temple period, and it was their existence that helped Judaism weather the transition.</p>
<p>Now, as we face these uncertain times in Jewish life, we can look to these same principles of change. The slashing of synagogue budgets and the laying off of clergy and staff is extremely painful. The spiritual and programmatic ramifications of our fiscal difficulties may have us limping for the foreseeable future. But once again Judaism must live on. And if we are unable to rely on our synagogues at this time to satisfy the needs of most Jews, we need to move to a model in which there are other avenues of connection. What might this look like?</p>
<p>If people are drawn to Judaism through social justice, they need a setting where they can focus on that work in a communal setting, and also have opportunities to learn and pray. If people are drawn to arts and culture, nature, or food, they need the same opportunities to be engaged. We must strive for variety and vibrancy.</p>
<p>Today, synagogues fight each other for members, trying to outdo the other with slightly better offerings. We try to cram many activities and programs into one building, stretching our limited resources even thinner. What if instead we worked together, as one Jewish community? What if one synagogue specialized in education, one in prayer, and one in social justice? What if people were members of the community as a whole, and not of one particular building? What if we referred members out as often as we tried to hold them in? We can create a new model of Jewish life where various institutions and organizations, both in buildings and in cyberspace, create a vast network of Jewish engagement and opportunities. If synagogues can focus on their strengths, putting all their effort into one or two specialties, they can rely on the other synagogues and organizations to fill the other needs of the community.</p>
<p>But the discourse also has to change. Some people may never set foot in a synagogue, but might be very active in other areas of Jewish life, and this has to be okay. If it is acceptable for us to be rabbis outside the synagogue, it must be acceptable for Jews to be Jewish outside the synagogue too. We will need even more options in the future. In some cases it will involve creating something entirely new, and in other cases this new model will involve taking aspects of the old and rejuvenating them. Perhaps we are not facing a transition as large as the one from Temple to Rabbinic Judaism, but change is happening. More and more of us in our 20s and 30s are losing touch with the Jewish community, and many Jewish institutions are facing existential struggles.</p>
<object width="425" height="344" align="right">
<param name="movie" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/ibblLIAVEFI&amp;hl=en_US&amp;fs=1&amp;" />
<param name="allowFullScreen" value="true" />
<param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always" /><embed src="http://www.youtube.com/v/ibblLIAVEFI&amp;hl=en_US&amp;fs=1&amp;" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true" width="425" height="344"></embed></object>
<p>It is up to us to step forward, not out of fear or survivalist tendencies, but out of an excitement for what is possible. The rabbis of the post-Temple period were well aware of the importance of their actions and of the transition they were carrying forward. It&rsquo;s time we stepped up and recognized our roles today. We get to define and shape the future. Each of us needs to ask, what does the future of Judaism look like to me?</p>
<p><em>Dan Medwin will be ordained in May 2010 from HUC-JIR LA, and looks forward to continuing to apply the latest technology to the advancement and enhancement of Jewish life. His wife, Lydia, a fellow HUC classmate, will also be ordained in May. </em></p>