---
layout: default
title: Return to Uzghorod: The Signs of Jewish Life
tags: [Around the World,Education,Russia,Hungary]
created: 1243987765
changed: 1248134585
---
<p>In Uzghorod, some streets have no name.</p>
<p>Between the Hungarian and the Russian, between the Latin characters and the Cyrillic, a bureaucrat forgot to post new street signs. The city itself has changed its name: from Ungvar&mdash;proud and Hungarian&mdash;to Uzghorod&mdash; Ukrainian, Russian. In 70 years, the rulers have come and gone: Austria Hungary, then Czechoslovakia, then Hungary again. After that it was the Soviets, and finally, Ukraine.</p>
<p>In the neighborhoods with few signs, people know street names by oral tradition, like some Talmudic code that&rsquo;s been passed down through the generations and the wars. &ldquo;That, over there, is Bolotina Street,&rdquo; the driver says.</p>
<p>Before the Holocaust, my grandmother lived on Bolotina Street, in a thriving Jewish neighborhood. More than 10,000 Jews lived in Uzghorod until March 1944, when the Germans occupied Hungary. They&rsquo;re all gone now. Almost.</p>
<p>Not far from Bolotina Street, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Taichman has renovated a small old synagogue and transformed it into the Uzghorod Chabad House. He came from Israel and built a shul, and a school, and a mikvah, all for the few hundred Jews who remain. Nine women in Uzghorod use the mikvah to observe laws of family purity. The number nine seems to imply a lack&mdash;it&rsquo;s one short of a minyan. But the rabbi is overjoyed. &ldquo;Light dissipates darkness,&rdquo; he says. &ldquo;I want to spread the light of God, of Torah, of the Jewish people.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Soon after I arrive, the rabbi and his Jews light candles. It is the first night of Hanukkah, and as the candles burn, the congregation sings praise to God: &ldquo;On the miracles and wonders you performed for our forefathers, in those days and in our time.&rdquo;</p>
<p>After the ceremony, the modest crowd mulls around and socializes. The younger generation speaks Russian and Ukrainian; the older generation speaks Hungarian and Yiddish as well. There are still survivors here, and they sit in the shul, talking to the few kids among them, eating jelly donuts and drinking Coca-Cola.</p>
<p>One man approaches me. Mr. Halperin is in his 80s, but has strong hands and bright eyes, and he looks dapper in a gray suit and tie. He offers me a donut, and tries to speak with me in Yiddish&mdash;he assumes a Jew wearing a kippah must understand Yiddish. When that does not work, he switches to the kind of biblical Hebrew that old Jews learned from books.</p>
<p>&ldquo;What are you doing here?&rdquo; Mr. Halperin asks me.</p>
<p>&ldquo;My family was from here,&rdquo; I answer. &ldquo;What are you doing here?&rdquo;</p>
<p>&ldquo;Uzghorod is home,&rdquo; he says.</p>
<p>&ldquo;Even after all that happened?&rdquo;</p>
<p>&ldquo;Even so. My family is gone. But Uzghorod is home. Happy Hanukkah.&rdquo;</p>
<p>The next night, the Jews of Munkacs, a neighboring town that spawned a famed Hasidic sect, join the Jews of Uzghorod for a party. The crowd is bigger, and the rabbi conducts a public candlelighting ceremony near the main town square, across from the Uzghorod Philharmonic Hall.</p>
<p>The Philharmonic Hall is a majestic building. The building&rsquo;s back, facing the Uzh River, is crumbling. But the front entrance on the square has been beautifully renovated&mdash;the arches soar, the windows shine. It gleams, even in the drab and dreary Ukrainian winter.</p>
<p>Before World War II, people may have made music in this building, but not with a symphony orchestra. The Uzghorod Philharmonic Hall was once the Ungvar Great Synagogue, though there is no sign or plaque saying as much. Before the war, the Jews could nestle comfortably in plush seats in the back, listening to the cantor&rsquo;s music bounce off the arches and slide through the windows and spread into the sky.</p>
<p>The rabbi is not interested in a sign or a plaque; he is living in the present. He uses a step-ladder to light an oversized menorah next to the Uzghorod Philharmonic Hall. A klezmer band plays, and 200 Jews smile and dance, and invite the confused townspeople to join them in spreading the light.</p>
<p>Last year, two of those townspeople firebombed the rabbi&rsquo;s house when he and his family were out of town. And the light burned brighter and brighter, until everything was illuminated, and there was nothing left but dust.</p>
<p>Rabbi Taichman and his wife, Chaya Mushka, have rebuilt their home beautifully&mdash;if his young children had not mentioned the firebombing, I might have never known about it. Now they must pay an armed guard to watch their property 24 hours a day and take extra precautions for the safety of their children. In a place that has seen the worst of anti-Semitism, the residents of Uzghorod have not exactly laid out the welcome mat for the rabbi and his Jewish renewal project. Which begs the question: why rebuild? Why live behind armed guards and iron gates when Israel offers a safe haven?</p>
<p>Rabbi Taichman may have his doubts, but he definitely isn&rsquo;t showing them. &ldquo;This city has so much Jewish history,&rdquo; he says, as he shows off a special room used to perform circumcisions in the house that was built anew. Recently, he used the room to give a 13-year-old boy a brit milah and a bar mitzvah. The boy is now counted in the Uzghorod minyan. &ldquo;This is a sign of victory,&rdquo; Rabbi Taichman had said at the time, &ldquo;over those who would disrupt Jewish life.&rdquo;</p>
<p>So Rabbi Taichman isn&rsquo;t going anywhere. He continues to fight&mdash;against history, and apathy, and those who would continue to disrupt Jewish life&mdash;so that Jews like Mr. Halperin and the Taichman children can continue to call Uzghorod home.</p>