---
layout: default
title: Ruth Wisse Had an Idea
tags: [Ideas and Innovation]
created: 1250883879
changed: 1250883879
---
<p>Ruth Wisse is a professor of Yiddish literature, born in Eastern Europe and raised in Canada. Her latest book, Jews and Power (reviewed in Issue Four of these pages), has granted her and her ideas a new attention in the Jewish world, attention that was emphasized by a &ldquo;festival of ideas&rdquo; around the book held in New York in May.</p>
<p>In her work on Jews and their particular relationship to power, Wisse claims that Jewish politics are marked by the embrace by most Jews of a liberalism &ldquo;native to their region&rdquo; in the way that wine is native to France. The central tenet of this political faith is a commitment to the idea that all conflicts are amenable to reasoned negotiation. As she writes, &ldquo;The pure liberal spirit precludes the possibility of intractable hatred or intransigent political will.&rdquo; Connected with this, Wisse contends that liberal Jews have shown to be willing to abandon Jewish causes like Zionism before they will abandon their commitment to the idea that there is no such thing as unjustified claims.</p>
<p>She is at her most original, and probably upsetting to most, when she connects the liberal belief in reasoned negotiation to what she sees as the Jewish commitment to a &ldquo;politics of accommodation.&rdquo; She argues that the Jews&rsquo; relationship to other societies during their long Diaspora continues to shape Jewish politics today, such that during the Diaspora, the Jews attained political autonomy through cooperation with the politically powerful by making themselves of use to them.</p>
<p>Jewish liberalism, it follows, is the result of the Jewish desire to accommodate oneself to the modern world by declaring one&rsquo;s political goals to be completely benign. In placing the root of Jewish politics in the need to survive the rigors of the Diaspora, Wisse argues that Jews aren&rsquo;t liberal because of the ethical traditions of their ancestors&rsquo; faith; they are liberal as a result of their broader relationship to society. As such, the emergence and continued reality of political antisemitism induces Jews to advertise ever-greater examples of their goodness in the hopes of disproving the antisemite&rsquo;s charges, thereby saving themselves from his anger.</p>
<p>Israel&rsquo;s popularity, then, has decreased for many Jews in recent years precisely because the enmity directed against the Jewish state has risen. The content of the critique is largely immaterial. As Wisse said in a recent conversation, Diaspora Jews who &ldquo;can&rsquo;t stand the aggression directed against them&rdquo; abandon Israel in an attempt to be free of that aggression. The more non-Jews pursue an anti-Israel agenda, and &ldquo;the more violent and distorting the instruments of their aggression, the more desperately the liberal imagination tries to blame the Jews for incurring Arab displeasure,&rdquo; Wisse contends.</p>
<p>It is easy to see how similar ways of thinking may have adapted themselves to the way Jews today behave religiously. The perennial claim against the Jewish religion made for hundreds of years is that it is insular and chauvinistic. &ldquo;When Scripture, in exhorting the Hebrews to obey the Law, says that God has chosen them for himself above all other nations,&rdquo; Baruch Spinoza wrote 340 years ago, &ldquo;it is speaking merely according to the understanding of those who knew not true blessedness.&rdquo; Jews, the critique goes, at best misunderstand the true nature of the divine by limiting their religion to a particular people rather than promoting it to all people.</p>
<p>As Alexander Schindler&mdash;original architect of the &ldquo;outreach&rdquo; policy to the intermarried of Reform Judaism, the largest Jewish denomination in America today&mdash;has written, &ldquo;My dream was to see our Judaism unleashed as a resource for a world in need, not as the exclusive inheritance of the few, but as a renewable resource for the many.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Wisse wants Jews to alter their behavior. In her eyes, the transformation promised by the Zionist movement remains incomplete, and Jews&rsquo; lingering attachment to conciliation became writ large even in the Jewish State.</p>
<p>Expressing an extraordinary pain that she and her husband have raised their children as they have&mdash;in their own image &mdash; because of the burden such ideas place on them, it is not a question for Wisse whether or not the battle is worth fighting. Historical circumstance has once again turned the Jews into the &ldquo;fighting front line&rdquo; of the ideals of tolerance, human rights, and democracy that are the modern West&rsquo;s foundation, and there is not much use in complaining about it. To fulfill these obligations, our need to transform our political behavior and take up our particular role remains paramount: only in spurning the temptation to make a virtue of powerlessness can we assert our legitimate rights as a people.</p>
<p><em>Matthew Ackerman is Ideas &amp; Innovations editor of PresenTense. He lives in New York City.</em></p>