---
layout: default
title: Sins of Our Fathers: A Short Story
tags: [Arts]
created: 1255287628
changed: 1255287628
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">The baby&rsquo;s wail pierced the silence. Chava stood by the window breathing quietly, listening. Before turning to the baby, she flung open the shade to stare at the three men standing in a semicircle.</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The first man shifted uncomfortably on his feet when the shade above him flew open. He turned, but found the window frame empty. &ldquo;They say that the evil spirits sleep under rocks to avoid the sun. The baby&rsquo;s cries will awaken them.&rdquo; The men stood with their backs to the white clay house. At this time of day, when the sun was its hottest, all of the other curtains in the surrounding houses were drawn. But a baby&rsquo;s cry stirred the settled quiet.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The baby&rsquo;s father pulled on his beard, his face wan and long as if he had stretched it by the bewildered stroking.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo; Cry, baby. Cry loud so they can hear you outside,&rdquo; Chava crooned. She stood over the cradle and stroked the child&rsquo;s cheek. &ldquo;You were born so early, born too soon into this wretched world.&rdquo; Even the word &ldquo;wretched&rdquo; sounded sweet on the mother&rsquo;s lips. &ldquo;I know the sun hurts your eyes, but you will get used to it. My Shachar.&rdquo; Energy flowed through Chava&rsquo;s body as she pronounced the forbidden name. The baby took Chava&rsquo;s finger in her mouth and started to suck hesitantly. Her cries turned to whimpers and finally stilled.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Chava looked around the room. Her husband&rsquo;s clothes lay folded in a neat pile next to hers on the open shelf. His large shirts, long enough for her to wear them as dresses, were still foreign to her. Surveying the mix of men&rsquo;s clothes and baby blankets that the community had brought over because of the early birth, she felt lost. Was this her room? As the baby sucked calmly on her finger, Chava pulled on her oversized dress, examining the shape of her stomach. When she was pregnant, her husband had rubbed her abdomen, to comfort the jumpy baby. Would he still do that now that she was an empty woman again?</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;She isn&rsquo;t named yet, is she?&rdquo; the first man asked.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&quot;Heaven forbid,&rdquo; answered the father &ldquo;Born so early. You know that&rsquo;s not allowed&hellip;&rdquo; He shook his head as he trailed off. &ldquo;What if she dies? Chava would be torn to pieces, our first-born more than a month early! Who has heard of such a baby living? If we named her it would just be so much more painful.&rdquo;<br />
&ldquo;And it is against the law,&rdquo; reminded the third man nervously.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The father lifted his hand to his forehead, first blocking the bright light from his eyes, then wiping the sweat from his brow. &ldquo;The sun is so hot,&rdquo; he said aimlessly, almost forgetting why they were standing outside during the hottest time of the day. The white town looked ghostly. The short houses surrounding the main town square were covered in dust, which swirled around their feet as well. The only thing moving was the stifling wind that seemed to smother anyone who dared come outside. Another wail rose from inside the house.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;Sippeettth.&rdquo; The first man spat on the ground, muttering under his breath an incantation to keep the evil spirits under their rocks.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Shachar&rsquo;s chest heaved. She let out a wail, forcing Chava&rsquo;s finger from her mouth. &ldquo;Shachar dear,&rdquo; Chava whispered, &ldquo;you have so much breath, such a strong tongue and a strong voice. How could they think you will die? You are so full of life. You have more strength than they have. They sit and they ponder the law, never coming to a decision, so weak, so indecisive. You lay here and protest, you scream. They have never screamed. They have forgotten what it means to scream.&rdquo; Chava raised her eyes to Heaven, &ldquo; Who is more alive?&rdquo; Shachar cried loudly, her body convulsing with every shriek. Chava laid her hand firmly on the baby&rsquo;s torso, her palm covering her whole baby from heart to abdomen, and the convulsions lessened, but the cries continued.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The sun sank in the sky, making eye contact with the men. Still they dared not turn towards the house, with its open window shade and crying baby inside. The two men on either side of the father turned toward him, trying to avoid the sunlight; the circle of three tightened. The father&rsquo;s pupils were tiny black holes for he had been staring directly at the sun.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;Friends, what can I do?&rdquo; asked the father. &ldquo;She cries to me. Not the baby, my wife. I don&rsquo;t know how to talk to her yet, to calm her.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">With his eyes focused on his feet, the first man summoned the courage to speak, &ldquo;It is against the law. The baby is on borrowed time; it is as if it is not alive. It cannot be picked up on the Sabbath&hellip;remember what the traveling teacher said last week?&rdquo; He continued to watch the dust collect on his sandaled feet.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;But the baby cries so much. She cries during the week as well, but not as much because Chava can hold her and soothe her. Chava has such a beautiful melody to her voice, nothing she has ever said to me was so beautiful.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The third man answered with a sigh, &ldquo;You heard what the teacher said, she must just wait a few more hours till the Sabbath ends. Look; the sun is already climbing down its ladder. It will be time for afternoon prayers soon. The teacher will be back at the end of the month. You can ask him then.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The baby eased into a whimper. She rubbed at her face with her small hands, trying to reach her eyes. Chava leaned over the crib and touched her lips to the baby&rsquo;s eyes kissing away her tears. &ldquo;They are mad, my Shachar, mad. They don&rsquo;t want a mother to pick up her own baby? I can&rsquo;t feed my own infant all Sabbath long? What kind of holiness does their teacher believe in?&rdquo; A wisp of Chava&rsquo;s hair fell out of its bun, brushing the bare scalp of the baby. Now that the baby was quiet, Chava could hear the men&rsquo;s voices wafting in through the window. The rest of the town must be sleeping calmly. &ldquo;What must others be saying of me? Does Chava know how to take care of her baby? Didn&rsquo;t her mother teach her how?&rdquo; Chava was sorry for speaking, even though Shachar was but three days old. Chava listened to the men talk in the courtyard. She couldn&rsquo;t make out their words, but she could tell from their tone that they were arguing. Her husband&rsquo;s voice stood out above the others. He was exasperated and whining to his friends. &ldquo;The rules,&rdquo; Chava sighed. &ldquo;He feels trapped, just like you, just like me.&rdquo; A tear dripped from Chava&rsquo;s bloodshot eyes on to Shachar&rsquo;s reddened cheeks. The baby let out another moan and resumed crying.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;I can&rsquo;t let this crying go on.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;I know it is tough,&rdquo; the first man offered without much consolation.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;She can&rsquo;t even feed her today. The baby is too young to suck the milk directly from my wife, but Chava isn&rsquo;t allowed to squeeze it out for her either. The Teacher said it is like squeezing an orange for its juice on the Sabbath: forbidden.&rdquo; The two men simultaneously scratched their heads. They were made uncomfortable by the image of his wife&rsquo;s breast, even though he purposely had not even mentioned the word.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;Perhaps the teacher will make an exception,&rdquo; the second man suggested. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ll ask him when he returns.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;That will be in three weeks!&rdquo; the father raged. &ldquo;We can&rsquo;t wait that long. I sent word to him that she was born early, but he didn&rsquo;t respond. If it had been a boy he would have come in order to perform the rituals&hellip;&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The men sensed that the father was losing hope. &ldquo;Just wait a couple more weeks. It is a deep sin to violate the Sabbath. Don&rsquo;t risk punishment.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The father waved his hand in the air silencing his friend&rsquo;s warning. &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t understand,&rdquo; he threw back.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;It&rsquo;s time for prayers,&rdquo; the third man said, still focused on his shoes. It was really several minutes early, but he couldn&rsquo;t stomach the talking any longer.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;I will meet you.&rdquo; The father turned toward the house as his friends walked briskly to the synagogue in the center of town.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">He stepped inside his home and all seemed black after he&rsquo;d been staring at the sun for the better part of the afternoon. He had traced its slow descent, as if punishing his eyes for the sight he was about to behold. Chava was standing over the baby&rsquo;s crib, her uncovered breast hanging over the baby&rsquo;s mouth. She did not see him walk in. She was concentrating on the baby&rsquo;s wailing mouth, trying to fit her nipple between the raging lips. &ldquo;Drink some, child. It&rsquo;s good for you, like my finger, but sweeter.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Without saying a word he turned and left the room, his heart as heavy as Chava&rsquo;s bursting breast. She heard him turn. &ldquo;Did they have anything to say?&rdquo; Chava asked.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;Nothing more.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;How will she drink my milk, if she doesn&rsquo;t know how it tastes?&rdquo; Chava left the obvious request hanging in the air. They had discussed this before. He turned to see her pleading eyes.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;Does it hurt?&rdquo; he asked awkwardly.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;It hurts not to feed her,&rdquo; she whispered. &ldquo;How much longer till the end of the Sabbath?&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">His eyes melted to silent tears as he approached his wife, still standing with her breasts dangling over the baby&rsquo;s mouth. He stood on the other side of the cradle and reached out with both hands. He cupped the plump breast and softly caressed it as he had done only once before in their short months married.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;They say,&rdquo; he sobbed, &ldquo;that if two people sin together, neither can be held accountable.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">A drop of warm milk fell on the baby&rsquo;s forehead, and the surprised baby stopped crying. Chava shifted her body the little inch needed so that the next drop fell on the baby&rsquo;s lips. Chava rested her head on her husband&rsquo;s arms as he continued to draw out her milk, the two of them forming an arch over the baby who swallowed hungrily.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">&ldquo;I told you she would live.&rdquo;</p>
</span></p>