---
layout: default
title: Slaves in the Holy Land: The Problem of Sex Slavery in Israel
tags: [Features]
created: 1255010321
changed: 1255010927
---
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">At age twenty, I had never seen a prostitute. Less than four minutes after moving to Beer-Sheva for my junior semester abroad, I had seen two. They were working at the local train station, southern Israel&rsquo;s commuting nexus; I crossed the street to avoid them, not wanting to get in the way of their business.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">As I settled into a comfortable dorm lifestyle just half a block away, I began to ignore these mysterious women for sale. I studied women&rsquo;s health issues in my classes; still, it became easy to forget those local women who desperately needed health care and services. Even from afar, I could tell that they were undernourished: their eyes bleary from drugs&ndash;their legs, in tall boots and short skirts&ndash;pacing listlessly.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">But after founder and director of the Center for Women&rsquo;s Health Studies and Promotion at Ben-Gurion University, Julie Cwikel, delivered a guest lecture about sex trafficking in Israel, I was shaken. Beyond the local problem I had glimpsed, trafficking is an extremely profitable illegal industry that coerces people over international borders, takes their rights and money, and then forces them into slavery.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">According to the United Nations Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, &ldquo;trafficking&rdquo; means &ldquo;the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harboring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation.&rdquo; This definition&rsquo;s wordiness cloaks the squalid reality of the trafficking industry: these women are often forced, abused, mistreated, and sometimes even killed.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">This grave human rights violation is neither foreign to Israel, nor to other Westernized countries with strong human rights legislation. Although the prostitutes I saw by the train station weren&rsquo;t necessarily trafficked, it&rsquo;s not unlikely. ATZUM, a non-profit organization based in Israel that hosts the Task Force against Human Trafficking, suggests that nearly 80% of Israeli sex workers are trafficked slaves. According to a 2005 Knesset committee report, between 3,000 and 5,000 people are enslaved and trafficked in Israel.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In 2000, an Amnesty International report caused Israeli legislature to pay attention to victimized foreign women&rsquo;s legal issues. Previously, there was broad legislation ensuring women&rsquo;s rights, but after 2000, the addition of Amendment 56 to the penal code overtly forbade the trafficking of human persons. In recent years, there have been further legislative and rehabilitative improvements, but the trafficking continues and related legislation is still pending. As Cwikel reports, legislation has been submitted to the Israeli Knesset that, if passed, would &ldquo;criminalize the buying of sex services from a woman who has been trafficked.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The next summer, I returned to Israel with a grant to study the myth of gender equality in Tzahal, Israel&rsquo;s military. I spent months in Jerusalem reading archival material, visiting recruitment centers, and interviewing women who had served since the early &lsquo;70s. The results were not surprising: historically, army women were treated differently than army men, despite the myth in the collective consciousness to the contrary. More surprisingly, while recent legislation supposedly created broader women&rsquo;s rights and opportunities, my research showed that society had not lived up to the law.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">In communal self-perception, women&rsquo;s rights are prioritized and protected under law. In actuality, from political to courtroom affairs, the &ldquo;old boys&rsquo; club&rdquo; (connections made in all-male army units) runs the show. When a man is accused of violating a woman&rsquo;s state-guaranteed rights, his connections often let him get away with little more than a wrist slap. This is most evident in cases of sexual harassment during the 1990s (my research focus) but the tendency is for the law to exert itself over a meme, a tendency further corroborated by negligent legal execution.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The public attention drawn to former President and Knesset member Moshe Katzav, accused of sexually harassing and assaulting women who worked in his office, may indicate a cultural shift. Perhaps the cultural acceptance of sexual harassment is beginning to fade. Still, despite media attention, the charges against Katzav were downgraded; on June 28, Katzav agreed to plead guilty to charges of sexual harassment and indecent acts, which came with a lighter sentence that offended many women&rsquo;s rights groups. Katzav got off without much damage to anything other than his ego, demonstrating that a true &ldquo;paradigm shift&rdquo; is yet to occur.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Even with preventative legislation, the extent to which women are protected from sexual enslavement is objectionable. Rabbi Levi Lauer, the founding Executive Director of ATZUM (<a title="www.atzum.org" style="color: rgb(190, 30, 45); text-decoration: none; " href="http://www.atzum.org/">www.atzum.org</a>), reports, &ldquo;The police do not close down brothels without a court order and a court order is seldom requested. Criminals often plea to a lesser crime, avoiding the mandatory sentences. In 2005, only 32 trafficking cases were concluded; 13 of them ended in a plea bargain.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Since then, Lauer charges, new legislation has made the warrant or court order unnecessary, although police inactivity continues. Rony Yedidia, the Consul of Israel to New England, relays far different information from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Justice: &ldquo;The police are far from passive, the recent State Department TIP report praises the state for its extensive enforcement,&rdquo; and reports that this March, &ldquo;The Israeli government filed charges against a police officer involved in trafficking.&rdquo; So the extent to which police are complicit in criminal activity remains unclear.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Israel is at a crossroads. The legislation for a society that protects its citizens&rsquo; basic human rights is in place, though it remains to be seen how that legislation will be enforced &ndash; both in the case of sexual harassment against women soldiers, and the rights of trafficked women. While prostitution is legal, pimping and running a brothel aren&rsquo;t. Moreover, as reflected in Lauer&rsquo;s and Yedidia&rsquo;s conflicting reports, it&rsquo;s difficult to ascertain the extent to which police enforce the law (or are involved in breaking it). Yet brothels are disconcertedly abundant in Tel Aviv and prostitutes are so common in Beer Sheva that I walked by them daily. Local newspapers abound with illegal offers of cheap sex, and the number of trafficked women, while difficult to calculate, is still in the thousands. If this behavior is illegal, and the police are supposed to stop it, then why is there still so much visual evidence to the contrary?</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">It would be almost redundant to point out the historical relationship between Judaism and slavery. Tearing ourselves out of the slaveholders&rsquo; grasp is a common theme in our history, yet we are turning a blind eye when this is happening in a country that promotes itself as a safe haven for those fleeing oppression and slavery.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>Many activists in this field have been criticized for &ldquo;airing out Israel&rsquo;s dirty laundry&rdquo; when Israel is already facing such scathing global critique. But as a progressive and Israel-adoring American Jew, I believe that it&rsquo;s more important to draw attention to the issue and to help these women than to worry about Israel&rsquo;s public image. In the end, Israel will look better for having taken the initiative to fix the problem. The Jewish community should not allow Israel to neglect its women, but, rather, should fight to ensure that its country&rsquo;s moral fiber stays intact.&nbsp;</p>