---
layout: default
title: SONG OUT OF SDEROT
tags: [Arts,music,israel,coexistence]
created: 1244237256
changed: 1244237256
---
<p>When thinking of Sderot, images of exploding Quassam rockets and the regional conflict between Jews and Arabs may immediately come to mind. Yet one woman from this southern Israeli town has a passion to unite these feuding groups through music that was born from the rubble. Smadar Levi brings cultures together with a hip but traditional Middle Eastern sound, accompanied by a trilingual band singing messages of peace.</p>
<p>The dark-haired Israeli songstress grew up with a strong connection to her family&rsquo;s roots in Morocco and Tunisia. Levi was blessed with an ethnically rich childhood, where Israeli and Sephardi Arabic culture blended at home, and she was taught to respect other cultures and believe in unity rather than separation. She fondly recalls memories of dancing to Arabic music as a child, as well as speaking Arabic at home. Levi says the most meaningful message she carries from childhood was: &ldquo;It is OK for Israelis to speak with Arabs, and to love one another, not hate.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Levi&rsquo;s passion for music grew into a profession and mission for peace almost by accident. After three years of serving in the Israeli army as a sergeant for communications during wartime, Levi moved to New York City to study musical theater in 2000. As she became more involved in her studies, she met a Moroccan musician who would sing songs very familiar to her. Realizing these melodies and sounds were very much a part of her, Levi was inspired to bring together her own musical group, The Smadar Band.</p>
<p>From the very beginning, Levi was as interested in the music as she was in how it might bring people together. She recruited Israeli, Turkish, and Arab musicians with the idea of uniting all three cultures through melodies sung in Hebrew, Arabic, Turkish, and Ladino. Her intention was &ldquo;to create a Mediterranean artistic expression which transcended all national and religious boundaries,&rdquo; as stated on Levi&rsquo;s website.</p>
<p>With a strong, sensuous voice, Levi advocates through her lyrics that Israelis and Palestinians can get along without the need for violence. She says she has dedicated her musical career to communicate ideas of coexistence to Jews and Arabs around the world.</p>
<p>&ldquo;There is a solution to every problem and it is important to empower the people who believe there can be two states in one place,&rdquo; she says. &ldquo;The people need to come together and perform change, not the leaders.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Levi&rsquo;s efforts won her an award in 2006 for &ldquo;uniting cultures through music to achieve peace&rdquo; from Seeds of Peace, a nonprofit organization. After receiving this award, Levi says she feels that, on a personal level, she has completed a mission very close to her heart. On a professional level, she says she has been &ldquo;extremely fortunate to have worked with some of the best musicians in New York City and elsewhere,&rdquo; attributing the award to their abilities as much as to her own. She says the award made her feel like she had &ldquo;found a home&rdquo; in the music industry by being able to represent what she stands for: spreading sounds of diversity and uniting people through her music.</p>
<p class="MsoNormal"><o:p></o:p></p>