---
layout: default
title: Tasty Bites to Smite Your Enemies: Rosh Hashanah's Symbolic Foods
tags: [Arts]
created: 1255287360
changed: 1255287360
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Rosh Hashanah&mdash;the summer is ending, the harvest is beginning, and the best part of the Jewish holidays are kicking into high gear&mdash;the culinary part, of course. Without the menu restrictions of Pesah (no bread!) or the spatial concerns of Sukkot (hope you like your chicken soup lukewarm!), Rosh Hashanah shines with gastronomic potential.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Beyond the obligatory exotic fruit to enable the saying of the blessing on new foods and experience&ndash;sheheheyanu, a wild array of vegetables and fruits elevated with symbolic significance and protective, meritorious, mystical, and auspicious properties enrich the first dinner of the new year. The exact varieties of fruits and vegetables prescribed by custom vary greatly&ndash;sometimes even from region to region in a particular country. Each symbolic food has an accompanying &ldquo;<em>yehi-ratzon</em>&rdquo; (literally&mdash;may it be your will): invocations to God to protect, enrich, bless, and redeem us. Often, the connection between the food and the request will be symbolic: apples dipped in honey for a sweet new year is the most universal.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Another big theme is increase, or multiplication&ndash;of our children, of our funds, of our merits before the heavenly court. For these, anything goes: from rubiya (black-eyed peas&mdash;the related Hebrew word&nbsp;<em>ribui</em>means increase) to&nbsp;<em>mehren&nbsp;</em>(Yiddish for carrots&mdash;a pun on the Hebrew&nbsp;<em>maher</em>, fast, quickly). Also eaten for the symbolism of meritorious increase are pomegranates, which have many seeds, to represent the multitude of our good deeds.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Lest we think all of these symbols are sweetness and light, many of the symbolic foods have quite violent implications&ndash;towards one&rsquo;s enemies or oppressors. Consumption of leeks (<em>karti</em>) is followed by a proclamation that our enemies should be cut down (<em>yikartu</em>). Chard, spinach, or beets, which are all botanically related and were collectively called&nbsp;<em>silka&nbsp;</em>by various Jewish communities of the Middle East and the Spanish diaspora are eaten with an invocation that our enemies should be expelled from our presence (<em>yistalku</em>).</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Not all of our enemies are people, though&ndash;sometimes our worst enemies are our own actions. This contingency is recognized by the invocation recited upon eating gourd or pumpkin (<em>kra</em>): that God should tear up the evil of our decree (<em>kra roa gzar dinenu</em>) and, instead, our merits should be read (<em>yikru</em>) before the heavenly court.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Here are some delicious recipes for preparing symbolic foods for the Rosh Hashanah meal. While most of the symbols are fine eaten raw, my family&rsquo;s custom is to prepare as many of the symbolic foods as possible as parts of the meal and spread out the invocations as each course is served.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">---</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; "><strong>And here are some recipes:</strong><br />
<strong><br />
Beet Salad</strong></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Boil 4 unpeeled, washed beets in salted water until tender when poked with a knife. Let cool, then peel off skins and discard. If you are using red beets, this can get messy, so be careful, or use golden beets instead. Dice into small cubes and dress with vinegar or lemon juice, olive oil, salt, and pepper to taste. If you wish, dress them up with a bit of crushed garlic and some diced parsley or cilantro.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; "><strong><br />
Black-eyed Peas, Syrian Style</strong></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">If using dried peas, soak 1 cup of peas for 3 hours or overnight in tap water, then drain. (Skip this step if using frozen or canned peas.) In a heavy-bottomed sauce pan, combine beans with twice their volume of water. Bring to a boil, then cover and let simmer until tender. (Time will depend on age of beans and whether you used dried or frozen. Canned beans need only be heated through.) Drain. Add a 4oz can of tomato sauce, salt and pepper to taste, and a few generous sprinkles of cinnamon and allspice. Let simmer until flavors meld. Serve as a side dish.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; "><strong><br />
Leek Patties (Keftes de Prasa)</strong></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">A traditional Sephardic way to serve leeks for Rosh Hashanah: wash and trim a bundle of three large leeks. Leeks often have sand or fine grit in them so wash them well. Dice leeks into rough 1-cm squares. Steam or boil the diced leeks until tender. Drain well, squeezing to remove as much moisture as possible. In a large mixing bowl, combine 1lb of ground beef or turkey with the cooked leeks. Add 5 large eggs and enough matzah meal to enable the mixture to be shaped into patties. For fried patties, heat a thin layer of olive oil in a skillet and fry the patties until golden brown on both sides. Drain on paper towels. For baked patties, dip finished patties in more matzah meal or bread crumbs and place on a baking sheet covered with aluminum foil and sprayed with non-stick spray or oiled. Mist patties with a small amount of nonstick spray or olive oil and bake at 375F until golden brown and crispy.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; "><strong><br />
Pumpkin Custard</strong></p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Although not strictly traditional, this delicious pumpkin dessert is quick and easy, and a great way to incorporate pumpkin into your symbolic meal.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">Preheat oven to 350F. Open 2 16oz cans of pure pumpkin (not pumpkin pie mix) into a large mixing bowl. Add 4 eggs and a cup of vanilla soy milk and stir to blend thoroughly. Season with either pumpkin pie spice or 1 tsp cinnamon, 1 teaspoon allspice, and a pinch of nutmeg (don&rsquo;t overdo nutmeg; it can ruin your custard). Add a generous splash of vanilla. Stir to combine and pour into a greased 8-inch cake pan (2 pie tins would also work well). Sprinkle the top with cinnamon and run a knife through the cinnamon to create a swirled effect. Bake until set and no longer jiggly in the center. Let cool before serving. Delicious with ice cream (soy or real).</span>&nbsp;</p>