---
layout: default
title: Text's Message
tags: [Ideas and Innovation]
created: 1250884477
changed: 1250884477
---
<p>At the Secular Yeshiva in Israel, students work through a Talmudic debate about what type of gateway and doors should be built at the entrance of a courtyard. For these students, most from nonreligious backgrounds, the debate has real world significance: their South Tel Aviv yeshiva has been broken into several times.</p>
<p>The debate highlights the tension at the school between the need to protect oneself and the importance of reaching out to the community. Should they install an alarm system? Double locks? A security code? They want to protect themselves from future breakins, but still want to create a community center they feel is open, concerns very close to those debated in the Talmud, the primary compendium of Jewish traditional texts.</p>
<p>Around the world, as a new generation of Jewish adults embraces Judaism on its own terms, new learning institutions&mdash;be they evening classes or full-time programs&mdash;are introducing students from less religious backgrounds to Jewish text study. The trend began decades ago but is picking up momentum today as more study centers are attracting a wider pool of students using texts that focus on personal growth, morality, and &ldquo;social justice.&rdquo; Beyond gaining skills in interpreting texts from Judaism&rsquo;s religious canon, students say they also get a better understanding of their Jewish identities through conversations with their classmates.</p>
<p>&ldquo;This is a generation that wants things that are authentic&mdash;full-dose, first-hand confrontation,&rdquo; says Rabbi Daniel Landes of the Pardes Institute in Jerusalem, which caters mainly to Americans. &ldquo;They don&rsquo;t want it to be dumbed down. At the same time, they will do it in their own fashion&mdash;they decide how they will accept Torah. People will construct their own identity.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Institutions such as Pardes, a full-time center based in Israel, and the Florence Melton Adult School, an evening-based program with &lsquo;mini-schools&rsquo; worldwide, set the path for crossdenominational learning in the &lsquo;70s and &lsquo;80s. While yeshivot, seminaries, and graduate programs abounded in the United States and Israel, few nondenominational organizations offered such opportunities to Jews without backgrounds in religious studies.</p>
<p>Today, such nondenominational institutions such as Yeshivat Hadar and the DC Beit Midrash have cropped up across the States. They attract many seminarians and students with a religious education, but also those on a &quot;Jewish journey&quot; searching for a better understanding of Judaism. Others come for a warm community committed to Torah study.</p>
<p>Providing a place for Jews of all backgrounds to learn together promotes understanding and helps build community, says Dr. Betsy Dolgin Katz, Melton&rsquo;s North American Director. &ldquo;The traditional and contemporary texts studied are our shared heritage. The knowledge and insights gained from text allows us to hear voices that have influenced Jewish life through the centuries and that shape multiple Jewish perspectives today.&rdquo;</p>
<p>Many Israeli-oriented institutions are trying to foster a more pluralistic society in Israel. Avoiding what they see as Zionism&rsquo;s rejection of the traditional Judaism of the Diaspora, they seek to reclaim religious texts for Jewish secular identity and incorporate Jewish ethical values and Jewish heritage into Israeli identity. One of the boldest initiatives to reinvent the secular Jewish identity has been the creation of the Secular Yeshiva, an outgrowth of The Bina Center for Jewish Identity and Hebrew Culture.</p>
<p>Bina&rsquo;s Program and Development Director Noga Samia says that the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin prompted intellectuals and educators from the kibbutz movement to form Bina as a place to reclaim Jewishness and Judaism from what she feels has been ceded from the time of Ben Gurion to the Orthodox and ultra-Orthodox. &ldquo;They were making the statement: &lsquo;This was also ours, we want to make this our own, we&rsquo;re going to make it relevant to our lives today and make it relevant to Israeli society today.&rsquo;&rdquo;</p>
<p>Noga also sees the concept of tikkun olam as Judaism for secular Jews, and so promotes &ldquo;social justice&rdquo; as a way to attract students to its center, making it essential to the Secular Yeshiva program. Students live and study in the neighborhood where they volunteer, an economically depressed neighborhood with a high concentration of foreign workers, refugees, and immigrants. &ldquo;What we&rsquo;re saying is that social action is a Jewish value as much as it is a humanitarian or human rights issue,&rdquo; Samia says.</p>
<p>It is this set of values that is brought to bear on their discussion about the gate. In the end, the students at the Secular Yeshiva in South Tel Aviv change from a lock and key to a modern security system. And Talmudic debate fueled their decision.</p>
<p><em>Rebecca Zimmerman worked in marketing and public relations in Washington, DC and made aliyah to Israel this summer. Before aliyah, Rebecca and her husband spent the year studying at the Pardes Institute in Jerusalem.</em></p>