---
layout: default
title: The Changing Face of Tel Aviv: Theater in the Non-Stop City
tags: [Arts,magazine,PT5]
created: 1257274169
changed: 1257274169
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Preparation for the 100th anniversary of Tel Aviv has elicited all manner of ideas from obscure municipality committees for potential landmarks to mark the occasion. Some have suggested putting up a carrousel, as in London, while others have enthusiastically pushed for the construction of a Hollywood Boulevard. These aesthetic proposals with little ideological significance underscore the fact that Tel Aviv is increasingly moving away from its complex ideological grounding. Its blueprint has changed from the vision drawn up by the early settlers&mdash;to create the first Hebrew city&mdash;to the insipid slogan of &ldquo;the nonstop city,&rdquo; coined by the Tel Aviv Hotel Association. If Tel Aviv committees seem to lack inspiration, instead of looking for Western symbols, they should take a close look at the young Israeli theater that has been able to balance ideological beliefs with artistic needs.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Theaters in Israel&mdash;most specifically the Cameri, Habima and Beit Lessin&mdash;have been thriving for years. This is surprising considering Israeli theater&rsquo;s relatively young age of about fifty years and its historic antagonism to traditional Judaism, which likens theater to idolatry. In Yerushalami, Berakhot, 4b, of the Talmud, Jews express gratitude to God for having made them frequenters of &ldquo;yeshivas and synagogues&rdquo; and not of &ldquo;the theaters and circuses; for I labor and they labor, I&mdash;to inherit the Garden of Eden and they&mdash;the pit of destruction.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">The creation of theater in Israel was the work of the secular Zionists, who aspired to break from their European counterparts. The new &ldquo;Hebrew Theater&rdquo; in Israel was designed to be radically different from bourgeois Western drama. Nachum Zemach, the founder of Habima, envisioned theater &ldquo;as a vital tool for the realization of the Zionist vision.&rdquo; Israeli theater was seen more as a medium through which to express ideological tenets than a means of creating an aesthetically pleasing product: the aim was to establish a dialogue, rather than to create a spectacular show. The ideological component of Israeli theater is in line with Jewish art in general, which historically has often contained more ideological or functional components than non-Jewish art. Israeli theater is also distinguished from Western theater in that it focuses on responsibility, and not human primal urges.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">If early Israeli theater was entrenched in the utilitarianism of the pre-State period and failed to achieve artistic superiority, the first major change came after the First Lebanon War in the 1980&rsquo;s. Israeli society was overwhelmed by the political situation, and as a result, Israelis sank into an escapist attitude. The new public mood manifested itself in the success of the Broadway musical&nbsp;<em>Les Miserables&nbsp;</em>at the Cameri Theater in Tel Aviv, which surpassed that of the more traditional political plays. As the repertory theaters began to produce more entertaining and profitable plays from adopted foreign cultural mores, the harmonious balance between ideology and aesthetics became increasingly disrupted by a Western influence in favor of a preference for aesthetic concerns alone.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">By this time, Israeli academics had already proclaimed the end of Israeli theater, asserting that it had shifted from High Culture to a Cultural Industry. However, in 2008, the achievement of the Israeli theater both in term of quality and popular success is undeniable; it has been able to keep its unique ideological goals and has simultaneously raised its artistic quality.</p>
</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">What is troubling for Tel Aviv is that the city seems to be at odds with its theatrical production. Whereas Israeli theater has acquired the sufficient maturity to treat the anomaly of Israeli existence as productive material and uses it to create realistic dramas and entertainment, Tel Aviv seems to negate its ideological problems, and solely concentrates on aesthetic issues. Tel Aviv should learn at least one thing from Israeli theater: in the Jewish vision of the world, aesthetic achievement can never overthrow or separate itself from ideological content.</span>&nbsp;</p>