---
layout: default
title: The Hebrew Slanguage: Unpacking the Junk from Israel's Trunk
tags: [Here and Now]
created: 1255009712
changed: 1255009712
---
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">Beyond the history, warm weather and beautiful people that Israel has to offer, visitors to Israel often experience something deeper and more spiritual permeating Israeli life&mdash;a healthy sense of humor. Israelis have developed this wonderful quality in order to cope with the many difficulties they have to face. For those of us who were not born in Israel, but have chosen to make our lives in Israel, we get the bonus of experiencing an additional layer of humor in Israel&mdash;laughing at Israelis, their culture, and their attempts to Americanize everything in sight.</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">As is well known, Israelis have a penchant for shortening words and creating acronyms. This is our inspiration at&nbsp;<a href="http://zabaj.com/" target="_blank" style="color: rgb(190, 30, 45); text-decoration: none; ">Zabaj</a>, the blog started by a bunch of anglo Olim from America. Zabaj is an acronym for &ldquo;Zevel Ba&rsquo;bagaj,&rdquo; which is a loose translation of the slang expression &ldquo;junk in the trunk.&rdquo; Our intention is never to insult or criticize, just to observe and highlight those lighter-hearted moments of our lives in Israel. For example, did you know Israelis love t-shirts with seemingly random collections of English words strung together as slogans? Some of our favorites are &ldquo;X-ray your emotions&rdquo; and &ldquo;Obsessed With Cloth&rsquo;s.&rdquo;</span></p>
<p><span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: 12px; line-height: 16px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">One can&rsquo;t blame Israelis for having to invent phrases and words for more modern inventions since Hebrew is such an old language. In the age of answering machines, if you called someone who wasn&rsquo;t home, you could leave a message on their &ldquo;mazkirah electronit&rdquo; (electronic secretary); today, you will have instead reached their &ldquo;ta hakoli&rdquo; (voice box). And did you know that while sirens on the top of police cars are called &ldquo;chakalakas,&rdquo; the single-light siren is a &ldquo;Kojak&rdquo; (named after the 70s TV show)?</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">More modern mishaps with English come from the frequent ad campaigns that Israeli companies run solely in English. Crocker Jeans&rsquo; ad campaign is a true hit, with giant billboards all over Tel Aviv. Each ad features a somewhat attractive Israeli girl, in really tight jeans, bending over (but not sitting!) along the tagline: &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t sit! Have a nice ass.&rdquo; At Zabaj, we like to imagine the smoked out, Fraggle Rock, red-dyed, henna hair, Israeli marketing genius that came up with this ridiculous slogan. &ldquo;Ze cacha omrim&mdash;hev a nize day&mdash;omrim hav a nice azzz&rdquo; (undeserved applause by all in the boardroom).</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Movie titles are a category all their own. In 1991, Oliver Stone&rsquo;s film &ldquo;JFK&rdquo;&mdash;initials apparently untranslatable to Hebrew&mdash;became &ldquo;Tik Patuah&rdquo; (Open Case). But silly American comedies are particularly susceptible to head-scratching Hebrew titles: &ldquo;Hot Shots, Part Deux&rdquo; became &ldquo;Dances with Chickens.&rdquo; As a modest bow before the power&nbsp;of American humor, one of the &ldquo;Naked Gun&rdquo; movies became &ldquo;The Gun That Died of Laughter&rdquo;; and, perhaps the translators either did not check with each other or proclaimed a comedy tie, but &ldquo;Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo&rdquo; was promoted in Israel as &ldquo;The Gigolo Dies from Laughter.&rdquo; (It&rsquo;s worth noting that the titular gigolo actually lived and went on to make &ldquo;Deuce Bigalow: European Gigolo&rdquo;&ndash; Israeli title unfortunately not available, but probably similarly hilarious.) Most ironically, &ldquo;Lost in Translation,&rdquo; a movie about missing translations is itself mistranslated to Hebrew as &ldquo;Lost in Tokyo.&rdquo;</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">As much as Americans have come to call certain products by their brand names (Kleenex, Xerox, etc.), Israelis take the concept to a whole new level: all cereal is cornflakes and all potato chips are Doritos. From the Department of Redundancy Department came &ldquo;rotev salsa&rdquo;&hellip; this, in a Hebrew-Spanish combo, means &ldquo;sauce sauce.&rdquo; The Hebrew expression for &ldquo;third time&rsquo;s a charm&rdquo; is &ldquo;pa&rsquo;am shlishi glida,&rdquo; which translates to &ldquo;third time is ice cream&rdquo;; this term comes from the time of the British Mandate when the English would say, &ldquo;If I see you a third time, I&rsquo;ll scream.&rdquo; Israelis heard &ldquo;ice cream&rdquo; and the phrase stuck.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Knowing that the list of examples can go on forever strengthens our commitment to our chosen life in Israel. Perhaps we hope that by pointing out some of these idiosyncrasies the society can improve and be more proud of its heritage. Perhaps we are trying to help newcomers adjust to life here (where, unless you pronounce Rothschild as &ldquo;Rut-cheeld&rdquo; or Lincoln as &ldquo;Linkolin,&rdquo; you won&rsquo;t get anywhere in a cab). Or, perhaps, we are just developing a native sense of humor.</p>
<p style="margin-top: 0px; margin-right: 0px; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 0px; ">Have a nice ass.</p>
</p>
</span></p>